MATE: Benchmarking Multi-Agent Reinforcement
Learning in Distributed Target Coverage Control
Xuehai Pan1,2,5
Mickel Liu1,2,5
Fangwei Zhong3,5,†
xuehaipan@pku.edu.cn
mickelliu@stu.pku.edu.cn
zfw@pku.edu.cn
Yaodong Yang3,4,5,†
Song-Chun Zhu3,4,5,6
Yizhou Wang1,2,4
yaodong.yang@pku.edu.cn
sczhu@bigai.ai
yizhou.wang@pku.edu.cn
1 School of Computer Science, Peking University
2 Center on Frontiers of Computing Studies, Peking University
3 School of Intelligence Science and Technology, Peking University
4 Institute for Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Peking University
5 Beijing Institute for General Artiﬁcial Intelligence (BIGAI)
6 Department of Automation, Tsinghua University
Abstract
We introduce the Multi-Agent Tracking Environment (MATE), a novel multi-agent
environment simulates the target coverage control problems in the real world.
MATE hosts an asymmetric cooperative-competitive game consisting of two
groups of learning agents—“cameras” and “targets”—with opposing interests.
Speciﬁcally, “cameras”, a group of directional sensors, are mandated to actively
control the directional perception area to maximize the coverage rate of targets.
On the other side, “targets” are mobile agents that aim to transport cargo between
multiple randomly assigned warehouses while minimizing the exposure to the
camera sensor networks. To showcase the practicality of MATE, we benchmark
the multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) algorithms from different aspects,
including cooperation, communication, scalability, robustness, and asymmetric
self-play.
We start by reporting results for cooperative tasks using MARL
algorithms (MAPPO, IPPO, QMIX, MADDPG) and the results after augmenting
with multi-agent communication protocols (TarMAC, I2C). We then evaluate the
effectiveness of the popular self-play techniques (PSRO, ﬁctitious self-play) in an
asymmetric zero-sum competitive game. This process of co-evolution between
cameras and targets helps to realize a less exploitable camera network. We also
observe the emergence of different roles of the target agents while incorporating
I2C into target-target communication. MATE is written purely in Python and
integrated with OpenAI Gym API to enhance user-friendliness. Our project is
released at https://github.com/UnrealTracking/mate.
1
Introduction
The target coverage problem studies the active control of the perception area of a group of agents to
track the targets of interest, e.g., wireless sensor networks [1], surveillance camera networks [2, 3],
and unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV) networks [4]. It has much real-life signiﬁcance and received
wide applications relating to social well-being, security, and entertainment. For example, smart
camera networks can be used for anti-poaching [5, 6], anti-smuggling [7], border security [8]
and—for more recreational uses—person-following [9, 10, 11] in ﬁlming and ball-tracking [12]
in sports events, etc. However, it remains an open challenge to cooperatively control the cameras
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).
†Equal Advising.

(a) 4C vs. 2T (9O)
(b) 4C vs. 8T (9O)
(c) 8C vs. 8T (9O)
(d) 24C vs. 48T (16O)
(e) Navigation
Figure 1: Five snapshots of The Multi-Agent Tracking Environment at different scales. Note that
here we abbreviate “camera” as “C”, “target” as “T” and “obstacle” as “O”.
in distributed networks. A few notable issues hinder the progress: the quantities of the cameras
and targets that vary in real-time, the increasingly diverse and unpredictable trajectories of targets,
the partial observability of the cameras, and the limited bandwidth of the communication networks.
These factors contribute to the difﬁculties in current research regarding multi-camera cooperation.
Recent successes in multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) [13] have demonstrated the
superior efﬁciency of multi-agent learning methods in tackling cooperative-competitive games
at super-human levels, as shown in gaming AI [14, 15, 16, 17], robotic manipulation [18, 19],
autonomous driving [20, 21], population biology [22], and etc.
Assuredly, the research on
target coverage problems would beneﬁt signiﬁcantly from multi-agent reinforcement learning.
Unfortunately, we notice that the popular MARL algorithms, e.g., MADDPG [23], QMIX [24],
MAPPO [25], HAPPO [26, 27] perform poorly in the target coverage problem [28], though they
achieved great success in other existing benchmarks [23, 29, 30]. These benchmarks are either
based on video games or some simpliﬁed scenarios, neglecting which features the real-world multi-
agent applications desperately demand, e.g., heterogeneous agents, asymmetric games, the variable
population of agents, simulating partial observation, and peer-to-peer communication. We have yet
to see an open-source and standardized environment that benchmarks the MARL algorithms under
such practical settings in the context of the target coverage problem.
Motivated by these ﬁndings, we build the Multi-Agent Tracking Environment (MATE) that advocates
the proposal of a more practical multi-agent system. Our system has accounted for both aspects
of fully-cooperative and fully-competitive games, the scalability and the robustness of agents, and
the communication efﬁciency among agents. MATE is an open-source simulation that hosts an
asymmetric two-team stochastic game between the “cameras” and the “targets”. Inside MATE,
the camera agents need to maximize the coverage rate on the “targets” while maintaining strong
coordination within the team to minimize overlapping detection. On the other hand, the targets
are tasked to maximize transport ﬂow between randomly assigned warehouses while minimizing
the time of being detected by the cameras. The game-theoretic theme in MATE stimulates the
emergence of innovative strategies between two teams of asymmetric agents, thus facilitating the
process of autocurriculum.
As a design consideration to encourage multi-layer strategies and
counterplay, MATE adds randomly spawned obstacles and transport tasks to offset the natural
advantages of both types of agents. For example, cameras’ mobility is restricted; therefore, targets
may hide behind obstacles to temporarily avoid exposure. Still, the freight and bounties would drive
the targets to stop hiding as soon as possible and carry on with their assigned tasks.
Worth noting that MATE is not anchored to entirely service the target coverage problem for training
a better camera network, but it also stands out as a multi-purpose benchmark to aid the advancement
of MARL algorithms. As discussed in the related work section, MATE has many essential features
demanded in algorithm-related research in MARL. Besides mixed-motive games, MATE supports
fully cooperative and fully competitive game types, which found popularity in the current landscape
of theoretical analysis on MARL algorithms [31, 32, 33, 34, 35]. MATE also provides Peer-to-Peer
communication channels, a topic that recently gained much interest in developing means beyond
information broadcast in multi-agent communication [36, 37]. The competitive game hosted in
MATE involves two-team of heterogeneous agents. The target agents differ in carrying capacity and
moving speed, marking further heterogeneity in learning the controls of target agents or learning
counter strategies against various types of targets as the camera agents.
We showcased a series of experiments to conﬁrm the feasibility of training for both teams
inside MATE. We reported the performance of four MARL algorithms (MAPPO [25], IPPO [38],
MADDPG [23], QMIX [24]) on different environment conﬁgurations.
We also showed the
performance of our agents in the cooperative game with multi-agent communication add-ons. We
observed the emergence of different roles (e.g., “distractors” and “running backs”) while training
2

Table 1: Comparison between relevant MAL environments (viewing with colors is recommended).
Environment
Game Type
Observations
Actions
Communication
Agent Type
Scalable
MPE (2017) [23]
Mixed-Motive
Continuous
Continuous & Discrete
Broadcast
Heterogeneous
Yes
MAgent (2018) [55]
Mixed-Motive
Discrete
Discrete
No
Homogeneous
Yes
Pommerman (2018) [56]
Fully-Competitive
Continuous
Discrete
Broadcast
Homogeneous
No
MARLÖ (2018) [57]
Mixed-Motive
Continuous + Pixels
Discrete
No
Homogeneous
Yes
Hanabi (2019) [58]
Fully-Cooperative
Discrete
Discrete
Broadcast
Homogeneous
No
SMAC (2019) [29]
Fully-Cooperative
Continuous
Discrete
No
Heterogeneous
No
Neural MMO (2019) [59]
Mixed-Motive
Discrete
Multi-Discrete
No
Homogeneous
Yes
GFootball (2019) [60]
Fully-Cooperative
Continuous
Discrete
No
Homogeneous
No
MAMuJoCo (2020) [61]
Fully-Cooperative
Continuous
Continuous
No
Heterogeneous
No
LBF (2020) [62]
Mixed-Motive
Discrete
Discrete
No
Homogeneous
Yes
RWARE (2020) [62]
Mixed-Motive
Discrete
Discrete
Broadcast
Homogeneous
Yes
DM Lab2D (2020) [63]
Mixed-Motive
Discrete
Discrete
No
Homogeneous
No
Flatland (2020) [64]
Fully-Cooperative
Continuous
Discrete
No
Homogeneous
Yes
SMART (2020) [20]
Mixed-Motive
Continuous & Discrete
Continuous & Discrete
No
Heterogeneous
Yes
MATE (Ours)
Fully-Coop. & Fully-Comp.
Continuous
Continuous & Discrete
Peer-to-Peer
Heterogeneous
Yes
target agents with communications. Lastly, we employed the adversarial training algorithms (Policy
Space Response Oracle (PSRO) [39], ﬁctitious self-play (FSP) [40], and self-play (SP)) in our
environment. The results suggest that training with such methods will decrease the exploitability of
the trained policies and thus improve their robustness. Regarding the development aspects of MATE,
it is extensively integrated with the OpenAI Gym API [41], which enables excellent compatibility
with popular RL libraries such as RLlib [42], Tianshou [43], Stable-Baselines-3 [44], and other
Gym compatible frameworks. The lightweight of the MATE attributes to efﬁcient computations on
CPUs. This property facilitates the opportunities for mass-scale parallelisms using high-throughput
architectures like Ape-X [45] and IMPALA [46], etc. Also catering to various research needs, the
setting of the environment can also be easily conﬁgured, including action space, observability,
reward structure, population, and scene layouts.
The development team will provide detailed
documentation on various features and commit long-term support to this project.
2
Related Work
Target Coverage Problem. The target coverage problem is to ﬁnd an optimal control strategy
for sensors such that the time to monitor every interested target can be as long as possible [47].
It is a long-standing problem in directional sensor networks [48, 49], robotics [50, 51, 52, 53],
and computer vision [3, 54]. Most previous algorithms are heuristically designed for a speciﬁc
setting or application, lacking a general solution for this problem. Recently, Xu et al.
[28] built
a 2D environment, formulated the problem as a multi-agent cooperative game, and introduced a
hierarchical multi-agent reinforcement learning approach to solve this game. However, compared
with the real-world scenarios, the environment is over-simpliﬁed due to random-walking targets and
a lack of obstacles. In MATE, we aim to build a more realistic simulator for benchmarking the off-
the-shelf learning algorithms, e.g., account for occlusion caused by obstacles, the limited observing
area of sensors, and controllable Field-of-View (FoV) of the Pan-Tilt-Zoom (PTZ) cameras. Besides,
we reformulate the problem as a cooperative-competitive game and provide an interface to control
the targets, i.e., the targets are controlled by adversaries to relentlessly challenge the camera policy
with new strategies for the purpose of improving the robustness and generalizability of the trackers.
Multi-Agent Learning Environments. Besides the context of MCMT, we have seen other multi-
agent learning (MAL) environments that service different tasks.
Table 1 summarizes the most
relevant MAL environments based on our literature review. To our ﬁndings, MATE stands out as
the environment that simultaneously offers fully-cooperative & fully-competitive game types, Peer-
to-Peer communication support, and heterogeneous agents.
Self-Play and Population-Based Training Regime.
MATE experimented with three training
principles to promote camera-target competition in zero-sum games. Solving zero-sum games can
be highly non-trivial due to the non-transitivity (e.g., Rock-Paper-Scissor) in the policy space [65].
Conventional self-play makes the agent continuously play against the latest copy of itself. Since the
agents in MATE are heterogeneous, we adopt the asymmetric version [66, 67, 68] of the self-play
training method. However, self-play may fail to converge due to the lack of policy diversity [69, 70],
thereby trapped by the non-transitivity. Fictitious Self-Play (FSP) [40] is a population-based method
that maintains a policy memory storing past versions of the policy and uniformly samples a policy
from memory as the response against the opponent. Policy Space Response Oracle [39] with Nash
3

Equilibrium solver (PSRO-Nash) is also a population-based method that computes a meta-strategy
distribution. Instead of a uniform distribution, the distribution computed by PSRO-Nash resembles
that of a mixed-strategy Nash Equilibrium. Recently, many efforts have been spent on extending
PSRO methods to diverse PSRO methods [71, 72], no-regret PSRO methods [70], and PSRO with
meta-learning [73, 74]. In this paper, we conduct experiments to demonstrate the effectiveness of
these training regimes for improving and evaluating the robustness of the tracking agents.
3
MATE: the Multi-Agent Tracking Environment
In this section, we will introduce various details about the MATE environment. There are 4 kinds
of entities in this 2D mini-world (shown in Fig. 1): NC proactive cameras C = {ci}NC
i=1, NT mobile
targets T = {ti}NT
i=1, NO static obstacles, and NW (= 4) warehouses storing cargoes. The reward
structure inside MATE resembles the “min-max” nature of a cooperative-competitive multi-agent
game. Camera agents must maximize their coverage rate collaboratively while minimizing repeated
detection on the same target. In the meantime, targets transport cargoes between warehouses as
fast as possible while minimizing the surveillance from the cameras. The role of obstacles in the
environment is to provide temporary shelter against camera surveillance, but at the same time can
act as roadblocks on the path to the destination for the target agents. The warehouses are scattered
at the four corners of the mini-world.
Plenty of cargo needed to be delivered by the targets between the warehouses, in which the cargoes
are priced based on the delivery duration.
3.1
Entities and States
We deﬁne the state as the internal attributes of the entities, which may change continuously as the
environment progresses. Every agent (or controllable entity) may obtain its own states (public +
private) but can only observe the public states of other agents.
Camera is an in-place, zoomable, directional sensor with a pie-shape ﬁeld of view. The publicly
accessible state of the camera spub
c
= [x, y, r, Rs, ϕ, θ] contains the self-location data in the
world coordinate system, the physical radius r, the visible line of sight Rs, the viewing direction
angle ϕ, and ﬁeld-of-view angle θ. In addition to these, the camera’s privately accessible state
spvt
c
=
[
spub
c , Rs,max, ∆ϕmax, ∆θmax
]
are constants indicating the maximum possible values for
these parameters, with ∆ϕmax being the camera’s maximum rotation speed and ∆θmax being the
maximum zooming speed.
Target is a mobile vehicle equipped with an advanced omnidirectional sensor for which obstacles
would not block the sensing ﬁeld.
The publicly accessible state spub
t
= [x, y, Rs, I[loaded]]
consists of the self-location data, the sensible range Rs, and an indicating variable I[loaded]
that indicates whether the target is loaded with payloads. The privately accessible state spvt
t
=
[
spub
t , vmax, W (1), . . . , W (NW), E(1), . . . , E(NW)]
are the maximum movement speed vmax, a one-
hot-like vector W to indicate the payload destination, and a bit array E to “memorize” if the
previously visited warehouse is empty. There are two kinds of vehicles for targets, one with high
speed and small carrying capacity, and the other with low speed and large carrying capacity. The
former is twice as fast as the latter but has a halved carrying capacity.
The Obstacle is a circular-shape static object that randomly spawns (controlled by a distribution) in
the environment. Targets may use obstacles to stay hidden from camera surveillance. We added a
transmittance attribute to the obstacles, so the cameras with a particular chance can detect the target
hidden behind the obstacle at each timestep. This design feature prevents the target agents from
over-reliance on this shortsighted strategy. The state of an obstacle includes the location and the
radius, i.e., so = spub
o
= [x, y, r].
3.2
Observations
Observation acquired by an agent is a partial representation of the true states of the environment.
By default, the agents in MATE have partial observability over the environment. An agent could
only observe the entities within its ﬁeld of view and obtain the publicly accessible states of these
observable entities.
4

Camera
Rs
2r
Rs,max
θ
Obstacle 1
Obstacle 2
Obstacle 3
Obstacle 4
Target 1
Target 2
Target 3
Target 4
Target 5
(a) Camera Observation (within the green sector)
Camera 1
Camera 2
. . .
. . .
Camera 3
Target
Target t′
Target t′′
Rs
Obstacle 1
Obstacle 2
Obstacle 3
Obstacle 4
(b) Target Observation (within the dotted circle)
Figure 2: Schematic diagram of agent sight ranges. The agent (at the center, colored in purple) can
obtain its own privately accessible state, and other agents’ and obstacles’ publicly accessible states
within the sight range (colored in yellow and gray). The camera can perceive the target (colored in
orange) behind an obstacle with the probability value of the obstacle’s transmittance.
Camera observations The observation of a camera c ∈C can be divided into ﬁve parts, the
preserved data spsrv, its own privately accessible state spvt
c , and the publicly accessible states of
targets and obstacles and other cameras within its ﬁeld of view. The preserved data spsrv contains
global information about the environment, such as the number of each category of entities, the
current agent ID in the team, etc. Fig. 2a shows an example of the camera’s perception in the
green-shaded area.
Target observations The observation of the target t ∈T is also composed of multiple parts,
including the preserved data spsrv, its own privately accessible state spvt
t ; and the publicly accessible
states of cameras, obstacles and other targets. Fig. 2b helps to demonstrate an example of the target’s
sight range.
Please refer to the supplementary for the mathematical formulation of the observations of both
camera and target agents.
3.3
Actions
Camera is an in-place directional sensor with two types of continuous actions: rotation and zooming.
These two action parameters can be adjusted simultaneously. Together they determine the shape
of the camera’s perception zone, though the area of perception remains unchanged. This design
consideration balances the expected values of the number of perceivable targets under all possible
action parameters.
Target is a mobile agent that can move freely inside this mini-world. Target’s action space consists
of the displacement vector v = (∆x, ∆y) in Cartesian coordinates.
3.4
Reward Structure and Types of Stochastic Games
MATE can switch between three reward mechanisms corresponding to the typical three types of
stochastic games. But ﬁrst and foremost, we will motivate the use of Mean Coverage Rate as a
reward function, which is an important metric used for evaluating MCMT tasks.
Mean Coverage Rate One typical method in RL for evaluating different models’ performances on
an equal basis is using the mean reward of every episode. However, we argue that mean coverage
rate, while strongly correlating to episode mean reward, is comparatively a more intuitive measure
for evaluating the performance of camera agents on tracking tasks. The mean coverage rate is
also a normalized measure that eases the problem of comparing results from different environment
conﬁgurations. For an episode with length L, it is:
Mean Coverage Rate = 1
L
L
∑
k=1
Number of Detected Targets at step k
Total Number of Targets
.
(1)
In an intra-team fully-cooperative game, all agents in the same team will receive team rewards based
on the team performance and would not differ between individuals. MATE, by default, uses Mean
5

Coverage Rate as the team reward for the camera agents. For the target agents, we propose the
transport reward to incentivize the transport of goods with the awareness of avoiding detection.
Formally, the target team reward is r(T ) = F + B and empirically we keep F and B roughly equal.
F stands for “freight”, a ﬁxed-value sparse reward received upon every successful delivery of the
assigned cargoes. B is short for “bounty” on every cargo. The value of the bounty will depreciate
per time-step and further decrease if the cameras have detected the target that carries this cargo.
Whereas in the setting of inter-team fully-competitive game, we let the camera team receives the
opposite value of the team reward of the targets, i.e., r(C) = −r(T ). The two teams are kept to
play a zero-sum game in the environment. In addition to the built-in team rewards mentioned above,
users can customize the reward functions with wrappers. Depending on the user conﬁguration, the
game setting may transform into a general mixed-motive game.
4
Core Features of MATE
Sample Efﬁcient and Easy to Use
MATE is a multi-agent environment based on numerical
simulation and implemented in pure Python with minimal dependencies1. Users can install MATE
with a single shell command. Without parallelization, a single-thread program can sample around
300 steps per second on a modern CPU2 in the default conﬁguration (4 cameras, 8 targets, 9
obstacles). Besides, MATE ships with various custom wrappers and built-in rule-based agents, and
the existing algorithms can run on MATE with few modiﬁcations. The source code is released under
the MIT Open Source License with detailed documentation. The MATE environment is out-of-the-
box compatible with OpenAI Gym API [41]. We represent the sample code at the following that
runs random action agents on our environment.
import mate
env = mate.make('MultiAgentTracking-v0')
# or gym.make
env.reset()
done = False
while not done:
camera_joint_action, target_joint_action = env.action_space.sample()
(
(camera_joint_observation, target_joint_observation),
(camera_team_reward, target_team_reward),
done,
(camera_infos, target_infos)
) = env.step((camera_joint_action, target_joint_action))
Communicative Agents MATE implements an intra-team communication channel for each team
that supports both broadcast and Peer-to-Peer communication.
Unlike the widely used MPE
environment [23], we explicitly isolate messages from agent observations so the user may customize
the message format, such as vectors or texts. Communication facilitates strategic coordination
among agents, preventing unnecessary exploration and repeated efforts, especially in a partially
environment
channel
environment
channel
environment
channel
environment
channel
agent i
agent j
agent k
oi
oj
ok
mij
mik
mjk
agent i
agent j
agent k
mij
mik, mjk
oi
oj
ok
mk (broadcast)
agent i
agent j
agent k
mk
mk
mk
oi
oj, mij
ok, mik, mjk
ai
aj
ak
environment step
observe
send / receive messages (round 1)
send / receive messages (round 2)
act
previous step
next step
previous step
next step
Figure 3: Illumination of the multi-round communication mechanism in MATE.
1Only NumPy, SciPy, Gym, and their dependencies are required.
2Tested using a single-threaded program with an Intel® i7 8700 @ 3.20GHz CPU. The agents take random
action in the environment.
6

Table 2: Overview of the baseline algorithms. The TarMAC and I2C algorithms are communication
add-ons that can utilize with other multi-agent reinforcement learning algorithms.
Algorithm
Category
Centralized Training
On/Off-Policy
Action Space
Communication
QMIX [24]
Value-based
Yes
Off
Discrete
No
MADDPG [23]
Policy-based
Yes
Off
Continuous
No
IPPO [38]
Policy-based
No
On
Discrete / Continuous
No
MAPPO [25]
Policy-based
Yes
On
Discrete / Continuous
No
TarMAC [78]
Communication
Yes
On / Off
Discrete / Continuous
Broadcast
I2C [36]
Communication
Yes
On / Off
Discrete / Continuous
Peer-to-Peer
observable environment. Users may add custom wrappers to simulate random signal noise, distance-
based delays, restricted communication ranges, limited bandwidths, etc. As Fig. 3 illustrates, MATE
supports multi-round communications, allowing agents to exchange several rounds of information
within the same environment step.
This mechanism can facilitate more multi-agent research
regarding negotiations [75, 76] and conversations [77].
Heterogeneous and Asymmetric
The heterogeneity of the MATE environment exhibits two
aspects: inter-team and intra-team. First, the agents in two opposite teams are completely distinct
regarding their dynamics and tasks.
Second, agents within the same team may have different
abilities, e.g., the vehicles for targets with varying carrying capacities and movement speeds.
These heterogeneities reﬂect a realistic theme and will allow agents to emerge with diversiﬁed
strategies and individuality in a complex environment. The MATE environment hosts an asymmetric
competitive game with two teams of heterogeneous agents. Asymmetry is not only reﬂected in the
heterogeneity of agents but also in the variable quantities of players in the teams. Under different
game setups, the equilibrium of the game change relative to the strength of both teams, and their
corresponding strategy should also adapt accordingly.
Variety, Flexibility, and Scalability In our default conﬁguration, two groups of agents perform two
tasks – the target coverage task for the camera agents and the transport task for the target agents. But
with our user-friendly framework, researchers may extend this environment to suit more missions for
the agents, such as deciding camera placement, trajectory prediction, resource collection, etc. The
default setup of the environment reﬂects the most complex setting in which the following features
are enabled: 1) mixed cooperation-competition, 2) continuous action, 3) partially observable, 4)
communicative, and 5) team reward only. MATE is highly modularized so that the users can convert
to different environments to suit their particular needs with our provided wrappers (presented in the
supplementary). Users can train a target or camera network curriculum by dynamically adjusting
the difﬁculty levels and transferring these policies across different settings. The number of entities
in the environment is also conﬁgurable. MATE may support simultaneous interactions between
two to hundreds of agents. As the quantity of agents varies, the complexity and difﬁculty of the
environment also change accordingly, which allows the emergence of diverse strategies. Simply by
varying the number of agents on both sides, the users can test the robustness of the newly-developed
Multi-Agent Learning (MAL) algorithms.
5
Experiments
In this section, we will present the results for (1) collaborative game where training one team of
agents (either cameras or targets) against rule-based opponents (2) additionally incorporates multi-
agent communications into the collaboration games (3) competitive game where training two teams
of agents using asymmetric self-play or Population Based Training (PBT).
For fair comparisons in the cooperative games, we ran each experiment between different algorithms
for 10 million environment steps. The model performance was averaged across experiments from
three random seeds to reﬂect statistical properties. We use and extend the RLlib [42] to implement
QMIX [24], MADDPG [23], IPPO [38], MAPPO [25], TarMAC [78], and I2C [36] algorithms in
all of our experiments. Table 2 lists the properties of the baseline algorithms.
7

(a) MARL baselines
(b) MARL with multi-agent communication
Figure 4: The learning curves for the camera agents in the cooperative game. The intervals (shaded
region) indicate one standard deviation over three separate runs. The target agents are (greedy) rule-
based controlled.
5.1
Training Cameras in Fully-cooperative Game
We conduct feasibility checks on the train-ability of camera agents using MARL algorithms on
MATE and accordingly report the training performance of the camera’s policies on the 4C vs. 8T
(9O).3 setting. We presented a hierarchical RL (HRL) model with a selection-based low-level policy,
which is controlled by a rule-based executor. The MARL algorithms only learn the high-level policy.
Moreover, we added a 5-steps frame-skip to the high-level policy, in which the low-level policy
would receive a signal from the high-level policy once in 5 timesteps.
The results in Fig. 4a demonstrate the superior performance of the HRL methods and the
steady convergence of the PPO-based methods. Fig. 4b shows the effect of adding multi-agent
communication modules to various MARL algorithms on the Mean Coverage Rate.
Enabling
communication for the MAPPO algorithm with the hierarchical agent structure hardly shows
improvement in convergence. We believe it is because of the strong inductive bias of the HRL
method, given that the policies for the low-level executors are based on pre-set rules (recall that only
the manager policy is trained).
5.2
Training Targets in Fully-cooperative Game
Figure 5: The learning curves (with inter-
vals of one standard deviation across three
separate runs) of various MARL methods in
training target agents.
Rule-based greedy
agents control the cameras.
In this section, we run multiple MARL algo-
rithms to train the target agents competing against
rule-based (greedy) cameras.
As expressed in
Fig. 5, target agents experience more conclusive
performance gains by incorporating the multi-agent
communication module compared to the camera
agents shown in Fig. 4b. IPPO with the TarMAC
protocol may achieve comparable performance to
MAPPO+TarMAC, given that the critic model of
the latter additionally has access to the global states.
MAPPO+I2C attains the best convergence out of all
methods implemented. Fig. 6 reﬂects the difﬁculty
in normalized reward for two different settings. In
2C vs. 4T (0O), partial observability does not sig-
niﬁcantly hinder learning for MAPPO but causes an
approximately 0.35 decrease in normalized episode
reward for the IPPO. In 4C vs. 8T (0O), IPPO failed
3Abbreviated “camera” as “C”, “target” as “T” and “obstacle” as “O”. Collectively 4C vs. 8T (9O) refers to a
game setting where four camera agents play against eight target agents with nine obstacles in the environment
8

0M
2M
4M
6M
8M
10M
Sampled Environment Steps
0.1
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
Normalized Episode Reward
2C vs. 4T (0O)
IPPO (Full)
IPPO (Partial)
MAPPO (Full)
MAPPO (Partial)
Rule (Random)
Rule (Greedy)
0M
2M
4M
6M
8M
10M
Sampled Environment Steps
0.1
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
Normalized Episode Reward
4C vs. 8T (0O)
IPPO (Full)
IPPO (Partial)
MAPPO (Full)
MAPPO (Partial)
Rule (Random)
Rule (Greedy)
Figure 6: A comparison between two different settings shows the signiﬁcance of the observability
mode in learning meaningful policies for the target agents.
in both modes of observability while MAPPO suffered an approximately 0.1 decrease in the reward
when switched to partial observability.
5.3
Zero-sum Fully-competitive Game
In Section 5.1 and 5.2, we present the results of training camera or target agents against ﬁxed-
policy opponents. However as these models implicitly treat their opponents as integrated parts of
the non-stationary environment, this would often result in over-ﬁtting or failure to generalize against
new opponents [39]. In realistic deployment, a stable and robust solution is often preferred over a
better-performing but brittle solution. Therefore to improve the robustness of the camera policy, we
proposed to train camera and target agents in co-evolution with a zero-sum payoff structure. For the
experiment, we trained the agents with three population-based methods: PSRO-Nash [39], Fictitious
Self-Play [40], (asymmetric) self-play, and present the performance comparison in Fig. 7.
Note that the exploitability of a policy or a population of policies is an intuitive measure of
robustness. The exploitability, in the context of MATE, is formally deﬁned as:
exploitablility(ΠC, ΠT ) = 1
2
∑
i∈{C,T }
[
U i(
BR(Π−i), Π−i)
−U i(
Πi, Π−i)]
,
(2)
where C, T refer to “camera group” and “target group”, −i = {C, T } \ {i}, BR stands for “best
response”, U i(·, ·) (i ∈{C, T }) are the utility functions, and Πi (i ∈{C, T }) are the policy
populations accordingly. For fully-competitive settings, U C + U T = 0.
The exploitability can be interpreted as the average performance difference between the best-
response (BR) and current policies. Low exploitability implies that both opposing groups have
approximately converged to their best-response policies at the current iteration, indicating proximity
to the Nash equilibrium.
In Fig. 7, both sub-ﬁgures show that PSRO-Nash and self-play can
converge to policy populations that are less exploitable than the populations trained against non-
Figure 7: The exploitability of both the populations of cameras’ and targets’ policies at each
population iteration. The left and right ﬁgures differ in the settings of the environments.
9

Figure 8: The probability distribution of the meta-strategy for each PSRO iteration for the policy
population of both camera and target teams. Both teams adaptively change their policy according to
the adversaries. The agents are trained under the 4C vs. 8T (0O) conﬁguration.
evolving, ﬁxed-policy opponents. Since Fictitious Self-Play uniformly samples policy from the
policy distribution, the random policy has an equal probability of being sampled as the other policies
in the distribution at every population iteration, which therefore explains the slow decreasing trend
in exploitability. Fig. 8 visualizes the progression of distribution for the meta-strategy taken by the
players (the camera team and the target team). A relatively scattered Nash distribution indicates the
presence of multiple plausible strategies.
6
Conclusion
Multi-Agent Tracking Environment (MATE) is a novel multi-agent simulation for benchmark multi-
agent reinforcement learning algorithms in the target coverage problem. MATE hosts a zero-sum
cooperative-competitive, asymmetric game between “cameras” and “targets”, in which cameras gain
team rewards to maximize the number of the covered targets. MATE incorporates the intra-team
peer-to-peer (P2P) communication feature and trainable adversarial target agents. This environment
is built purely in Python and integrated with OpenAI Gym API [41] enabling great compatibility and
extensibility to most distributive RL frameworks. The lightweight of this environment also ensures
high sampling efﬁciency. MATE allows for ﬂexible conﬁgurations for the simulation environments
along with highly customized scenarios to fulﬁll speciﬁc research needs. We conduct a series of
benchmarks to show the performance of target and camera agents trained by MARL methods and
algorithms in various settings. We hope this work will serve as a useful guide for the community
using MATE to conduct further research.
Limitations. The ﬁrst-stage focus of MATE is to provide an all-in-one benchmark for testing
various MARL algorithms and a new platform for studying distributed target coverage tasks with
trainable adversaries. Admittedly, the focus of MATE is lesser on the aspects of visual perceptions,
for example, evaluations in three-dimensional space. For these purposes, one of our future works
will extend MATE into the high-quality 3D game engine, e.g., developing realistic environments on
Unreal Engine 4 (UE4) with UnrealCV [79].
Fair Use of the Dataset. Despite MATE was not purposefully designed for scenarios that incur
direct violation of privacy or harm the well-being of others, the theme of MATE brings up a valuable
topic of discussion with regard to a recognized conﬂict between the advancement of AI technologies
and the integrity of social well-being. Although the possibility of direct application of MATE to
other exploitative systems remains slim, the transfer of knowledge between multi-agent tracking
systems is theoretically plausible. While enjoying the beneﬁts of training smarter camera systems
using MATE, we do have genuine concerns about the negative societal impacts due to the misuse
of tracking technologies in repressive surveillance. We hereby advocate for more responsible use
of multi-agent tracking environments including MATE and we condemn the act of using MATE or
other similar systems for malicious activities.
10

7
Acknowledgements
This project was supported by MOST-2018AAA0102004, NSFC-62061136001, China National
Post-doctoral Program for Innovative Talents (Grant No. BX2021008), and Qualcomm University
Research Grant.
We also thank Jing Xu, Yurong Chen, and Yuanfei Wang for their insightful
discussions.
11

References
[1] Jennifer Yick, Biswanath Mukherjee, and Dipak Ghosal.
Wireless sensor network survey.
Computer Networks, 52(12):2292–2330, 2008.
[2] Hamid Aghajan and Andrea Cavallaro. Multi-camera networks: principles and applications.
Academic press, 2009.
[3] Jing Li, Jing Xu, Fangwei Zhong, Xiangyu Kong, Yu Qiao, and Yizhou Wang.
Pose-
assisted multi-camera collaboration for active object tracking. AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial
Intelligence, 34(01):759–766, Apr. 2020.
[4] Samira Hayat, Ev¸sen Yanmaz, and Raheeb Muzaffar.
Survey on unmanned aerial vehicle
networks for civil applications: A communications viewpoint. IEEE Communications Surveys
& Tutorials, 18(4):2624–2661, 2016.
[5] Spynel-X Infrared Search & Track System - Wide area surveillance.
https://
hgh-infrared.com/spynel-x.
[6] Andries M. Heyns. Optimisation of surveillance camera site locations and viewing angles
using a novel multi-attribute, multi-objective genetic algorithm: A day/night anti-poaching
application. Computers, Environment and Urban Systems, 88:101638, 2021.
[7] Mark M. Pitt. Smuggling and price disparity. Journal of International Economics, 11(4):447–
458, 1981.
[8] U S Patrol.
Privacy impact assessment update for the border surveillance systems (BSS).
DHS/CBP, PIA-022 (A), 2018.
[9] Matthias Müller and Vladlen Koltun.
Openbot:
Turning smartphones into robots.
In
International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), 2021.
[10] Wenhan Luo, Peng Sun, Fangwei Zhong, Wei Liu, Tong Zhang, and Yizhou Wang. End-to-
end active object tracking via reinforcement learning. In International Conference on Machine
Learning, pages 3286–3295, 2018.
[11] Wenhan Luo, Peng Sun, Fangwei Zhong, Wei Liu, Tong Zhang, and Yizhou Wang. End-to-
end active object tracking and its real-world deployment via reinforcement learning. IEEE
Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, 42(6):1317–1332, 2019.
[12] Ball tracking - A new era of tactical game analysis. https://kinexon.com/technology/
ball-tracking.
[13] Yaodong Yang and Jun Wang. An overview of multi-agent reinforcement learning from game
theoretical perspective. arXiv preprint arXiv:2011.00583, 2020.
[14] Bowen Baker, Ingmar Kanitscheider, Todor Markov, Yi Wu, Glenn Powell, Bob McGrew, and
Igor Mordatch. Emergent tool use from multi-agent autocurricula. In International Conference
on Learning Representations, 2020.
[15] Christopher Berner, Greg Brockman, Brooke Chan, Vicki Cheung, Przemysław D˛ebiak,
Christy Dennison, David Farhi, Quirin Fischer, Shariq Hashme, Chris Hesse, et al. Dota 2
with large scale deep reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1912.06680, 2019.
[16] Oriol Vinyals, Igor Babuschkin, Wojciech M Czarnecki, Michaël Mathieu, Andrew Dudzik,
Junyoung Chung, David H Choi, Richard Powell, Timo Ewalds, Petko Georgiev, et al. Grand-
master level in starcraft ii using multi-agent reinforcement learning. Nature, 575(7782):350–
354, 2019.
[17] P Peng, Q Yuan, Y Wen, Y Yang, Z Tang, H Long, and J Wang. Multiagent bidirectionally-
coordinated nets for learning to play starcraft combat games. arXiv preprint arXiv:1703.10069,
2017.
12

[18] Yuanpei Chen, Tianhao Wu, Shengjie Wang, Xidong Feng, Jiechuan Jiang, Zongqing Lu,
Stephen Marcus McAleer, Hao Dong, Song-Chun Zhu, and Yaodong Yang. Towards human-
level bimanual dexterous manipulation with reinforcement learning. In Neural Information
Processing Systems Datasets and Benchmarks Track, 2022.
[19] Yiran Geng, Boshi An, Haoran Geng, Yuanpei Chen, Yaodong Yang, and Hao Dong. End-to-
end affordance learning for robotic manipulation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.12941, 2022.
[20] Ming Zhou, Jun Luo, Julian Villella, Yaodong Yang, David Rusu, Jiayu Miao, Weinan Zhang,
Montgomery Alban, Iman Fadakar, Zheng Chen, Aurora Chongxi Huang, Ying Wen, Kimia
Hassanzadeh, Daniel Graves, Dong Chen, Zhengbang Zhu, Nhat Nguyen, Mohamed Elsayed,
Kun Shao, Sanjeevan Ahilan, Baokuan Zhang, Jiannan Wu, Zhengang Fu, Kasra Rezaee,
Peyman Yadmellat, Mohsen Rohani, Nicolas Perez Nieves, Yihan Ni, Seyedershad Banijamali,
Alexander Cowen Rivers, Zheng Tian, Daniel Palenicek, Haitham bou Ammar, Hongbo Zhang,
Wulong Liu, Jianye Hao, and Jun Wang. Smarts: Scalable multi-agent reinforcement learning
training school for autonomous driving. In Conference on Robot Learning (CoRL), 11 2020.
[21] Minne Li, Zhiwei Qin, Yan Jiao, Yaodong Yang, Jun Wang, Chenxi Wang, Guobin Wu, and
Jieping Ye. Efﬁcient ridesharing order dispatching with mean ﬁeld multi-agent reinforcement
learning. In The World Wide Web Conference, pages 983–994, 2019.
[22] Yaodong Yang, Lantao Yu, Yiwei Bai, Jun Wang, Weinan Zhang, Ying Wen, and Yong Yu.
A study of ai population dynamics with million-agent reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1709.04511, 2017.
[23] Ryan Lowe, Yi Wu, Aviv Tamar, Jean Harb, OpenAI Pieter Abbeel, and Igor Mordatch. Multi-
agent actor-critic for mixed cooperative-competitive environments. In Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems, pages 6379–6390, 2017.
[24] Tabish Rashid, Mikayel Samvelyan, Christian Schroeder, Gregory Farquhar, Jakob Foerster,
and Shimon Whiteson. QMIX: Monotonic value function factorisation for deep multi-agent
reinforcement learning.
In Proceedings of the 35th International Conference on Machine
Learning, volume 80 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pages 4295–4304. PMLR,
10–15 Jul 2018.
[25] Chao Yu, Akash Velu, Eugene Vinitsky, Jiaxuan Gao, Yu Wang, Alexandre Bayen, and Yi Wu.
The surprising effectiveness of PPO in cooperative multi-agent games. In Neural Information
Processing Systems Datasets and Benchmarks Track, 2022.
[26] Jakub Grudzien Kuba, Ruiqing Chen, Muning Wen, Ying Wen, Fanglei Sun, Jun Wang, and
Yaodong Yang. Trust region policy optimisation in multi-agent reinforcement learning. In
International Conference on Learning Representations, 2021.
[27] Jakub Grudzien Kuba, Xidong Feng, Shiyao Ding, Hao Dong, Jun Wang, and Yaodong Yang.
Heterogeneous-agent mirror learning: A continuum of solutions to cooperative marl. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2208.01682, 2022.
[28] Jing Xu, Fangwei Zhong, and Yizhou Wang. Learning multi-agent coordination for enhancing
target coverage in directional sensor networks. Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems, 33:10053–10064, 2020.
[29] Mikayel Samvelyan, Tabish Rashid, Christian Schroeder De Witt, Gregory Farquhar, Nantas
Nardelli, Tim GJ Rudner, Chia-Man Hung, Philip HS Torr, Jakob Foerster, and Shimon
Whiteson. The starcraft multi-agent challenge. arXiv preprint arXiv:1902.04043, 2019.
[30] Ming Zhou, Ziyu Wan, Hanjing Wang, Muning Wen, Runzhe Wu, Ying Wen, Yaodong Yang,
Weinan Zhang, and Jun Wang. Malib: A parallel framework for population-based multi-agent
reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.07551, 2021.
[31] Jakub Grudzien Kuba, Ruiqing Chen, Muning Wen, Ying Wen, Fanglei Sun, Jun Wang, and
Yaodong Yang. Trust region policy optimisation in multi-agent reinforcement learning. In
International Conference on Learning Representations, 2022.
13

[32] Kaiqing Zhang, Zhuoran Yang, and Tamer Ba¸sar. Policy Optimization Provably Converges to
Nash Equilibria in Zero-Sum Linear Quadratic Games. Red Hook, NY, USA, 2019.
[33] Kyunghwan Son, Daewoo Kim, Wan Ju Kang, David Earl Hostallero, and Yung Yi. QTRAN:
Learning to factorize with transformation for cooperative multi-agent reinforcement learning.
In International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 97 of Proceedings of Machine
Learning Research, pages 5887–5896. PMLR, 09–15 Jun 2019.
[34] Julien Perolat, Bilal Piot, and Olivier Pietquin. Actor-critic ﬁctitious play in simultaneous
move multistage games. In International Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Statistics,
volume 84 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pages 919–928. PMLR, 09–11 Apr
2018.
[35] Xiaotie Deng, Yuhao Li, David Henry Mguni, Jun Wang, and Yaodong Yang.
On the
complexity of computing markov perfect equilibrium in general-sum stochastic games. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2109.01795, 2021.
[36] Ziluo Ding, Tiejun Huang, and Zongqing Lu. Learning individually inferred communication
for multi-agent cooperation.
In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, vol-
ume 33, pages 22069–22079, 2020.
[37] Yuanfei Wang, Fangwei Zhong, Jing Xu, and Yizhou Wang. Tom2c: Target-oriented multi-
agent communication and cooperation with theory of mind. In International Conference on
Learning Representations, 2022.
[38] Christian Schroeder de Witt, Tarun Gupta, Denys Makoviichuk, Viktor Makoviychuk, Philip
H. S. Torr, Mingfei Sun, and Shimon Whiteson. Is independent learning all you need in the
starcraft multi-agent challenge? arXiv preprint arXiv:2011.09533, 2020.
[39] Marc Lanctot, Vinicius Zambaldi, Audrunas Gruslys, Angeliki Lazaridou, Karl Tuyls, Julien
Pérolat, David Silver, and Thore Graepel. A uniﬁed game-theoretic approach to multiagent
reinforcement learning. Advances in neural information processing systems, 30, 2017.
[40] Johannes Heinrich, Marc Lanctot, and David Silver. Fictitious self-play in extensive-form
games. In Francis R. Bach and David M. Blei, editors, International Conference on Machine
Learning, volume 37 of JMLR Workshop and Conference Proceedings, pages 805–813.
JMLR.org, 2015.
[41] Greg Brockman, Vicki Cheung, Ludwig Pettersson, Jonas Schneider, John Schulman, Jie Tang,
and Wojciech Zaremba. Openai gym. arXiv preprint arXiv:1606.01540, 2016.
[42] Eric Liang, Richard Liaw, Robert Nishihara, Philipp Moritz, Roy Fox, Ken Goldberg, Joseph
Gonzalez, Michael Jordan, and Ion Stoica. RLlib: Abstractions for distributed reinforcement
learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 80, pages 3053–3062.
PMLR, 10–15 Jul 2018.
[43] Jiayi Weng, Huayu Chen, Dong Yan, Kaichao You, Alexis Duburcq, Minghao Zhang, Yi Su,
Hang Su, and Jun Zhu. Tianshou: A highly modularized deep reinforcement learning library.
Journal of Machine Learning Research, 23(267):1–6, 2022.
[44] Antonin Rafﬁn, Ashley Hill, Adam Gleave, Anssi Kanervisto, Maximilian Ernestus, and Noah
Dormann. Stable-baselines3: Reliable reinforcement learning implementations. Journal of
Machine Learning Research, 22(268):1–8, 2021.
[45] Dan Horgan, John Quan, David Budden, Gabriel Barth-Maron, Matteo Hessel, Hado van
Hasselt, and David Silver.
Distributed prioritized experience replay.
In International
Conference on Learning Representations, 2018.
[46] Lasse Espeholt, Hubert Soyer, Remi Munos, Karen Simonyan, Vlad Mnih, Tom Ward,
Yotam Doron, Vlad Firoiu, Tim Harley, Iain Dunning, Shane Legg, and Koray Kavukcuoglu.
IMPALA: Scalable distributed deep-RL with importance weighted actor-learner architectures.
In International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 80 of Proceedings of Machine
Learning Research, pages 1407–1416. PMLR, 10–15 Jul 2018.
14

[47] S Mini, Siba K Udgata, and Samrat L Sabat. Sensor deployment and scheduling for target
coverage problem in wireless sensor networks. IEEE Sensors Journal, 14(3):636–644, 2013.
[48] Huadong Ma and Yonghe Liu. Some problems of directional sensor networks. International
Journal of Sensor Networks, 2(1-2):44–52, 2007.
[49] M Amac Guvensan and A Gokhan Yavuz. On coverage issues in directional sensor networks:
A survey. Ad Hoc Networks, 9(7):1238–1255, 2011.
[50] Dimitrios Zorbas, Luigi Di Puglia Pugliese, Tahiry Razaﬁndralambo, and Francesca Guerriero.
Optimal drone placement and cost-efﬁcient target coverage. Journal of Network and Computer
Applications, 75:16–31, 2016.
[51] Ahmed Saeed, Ahmed Abdelkader, Mouhyemen Khan, Azin Neishaboori, Khaled A Harras,
and Amr Mohamed. Argus: realistic target coverage by drones. In ACM/IEEE International
Conference on Information Processing in Sensor Networks, pages 155–166, 2017.
[52] Mouhyemen Khan, Karel Heurtefeux, Amr Mohamed, Khaled A Harras, and Moham-
mad Mehedi Hassan.
Mobile target coverage and tracking on drone-be-gone uav cyber-
physical testbed. IEEE Systems Journal, 12(4):3485–3496, 2017.
[53] Eva Tuba, Romana Capor-Hrosik, Adis Alihodzic, and Milan Tuba.
Drone placement for
optimal coverage by brain storm optimization algorithm.
In International Conference on
Hybrid Intelligent Systems, pages 167–176. Springer, 2017.
[54] Ergys Ristani, Francesco Solera, Roger Zou, Rita Cucchiara, and Carlo Tomasi. Performance
measures and a data set for multi-target, multi-camera tracking. In European Conference on
Computer Vision, pages 17–35. Springer, 2016.
[55] Lianmin Zheng, Jiacheng Yang, Han Cai, Ming Zhou, Weinan Zhang, Jun Wang, and Yong Yu.
Magent: A many-agent reinforcement learning platform for artiﬁcial collective intelligence. In
AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence, volume 32, 2018.
[56] Cinjon Resnick, Wes Eldridge, David Ha, Denny Britz, Jakob Foerster, Julian Togelius,
Kyunghyun Cho, and Joan Bruna. Pommerman: A multi-agent playground. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1809.07124, 2018.
[57] Diego Perez-Liebana, Katja Hofmann, Sharada Prasanna Mohanty, Noburu Kuno, Andre
Kramer, Sam Devlin, Raluca D. Gaina, and Daniel Ionita. The multi-agent reinforcement
learning in malmÖ (marlÖ) competition. arXiv preprint arXiv:1901.08129, 2019.
[58] Nolan Bard, Jakob N. Foerster, Sarath Chandar, Neil Burch, Marc Lanctot, H. Francis Song,
Emilio Parisotto, Vincent Dumoulin, Subhodeep Moitra, Edward Hughes, Iain Dunning, Shibl
Mourad, Hugo Larochelle, Marc G. Bellemare, and Michael Bowling. The hanabi challenge:
A new frontier for ai research. Artiﬁcial Intelligence, 280, 2020.
[59] Joseph Suarez, Yilun Du, Clare Zhu, Igor Mordatch, and Phillip Isola.
The neural mmo
platform for massively multiagent research. In Neural Information Processing Systems Track
on Datasets and Benchmarks, volume 1, 2021.
[60] Karol Kurach, Anton Raichuk, Piotr Stanczyk, Michal Zajac, Olivier Bachem, Lasse Espeholt,
Carlos Riquelme, Damien Vincent, Marcin Michalski, Olivier Bousquet, and Sylvain Gelly.
Google research football: A novel reinforcement learning environment. In AAAI Conference
on Artiﬁcial Intelligence, 2020.
[61] Bei Peng, Tabish Rashid, Christian Schroeder de Witt, Pierre-Alexandre Kamienny, Philip Torr,
Wendelin Boehmer, and Shimon Whiteson. Facmac: Factored multi-agent centralised policy
gradients. In M. Ranzato, A. Beygelzimer, Y. Dauphin, P.S. Liang, and J. Wortman Vaughan,
editors, Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 34, pages 12208–12221,
2021.
[62] Filippos Christianos, Lukas Schäfer, and Stefano Albrecht. Shared experience actor-critic for
multi-agent reinforcement learning. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
volume 33, pages 10707–10717, 2020.
15

[63] Charles Beattie, Thomas Köppe, Edgar A. Duéñez-Guzmán, and Joel Z. Leibo. Deepmind
lab2d. arXiv preprint arXiv:2011.07027, 2020.
[64] Sharada Mohanty, Erik Nygren, Florian Laurent, Manuel Schneider, Christian Scheller,
Nilabha Bhattacharya, Jeremy Watson, Adrian Egli, Christian Eichenberger, Christian Baum-
berger, Gereon Vienken, Irene Sturm, Guillaume Sartoretti, and Giacomo Spigler. Flatland-rl :
Multi-agent reinforcement learning on trains. arXiv preprint arXiv:2012.05893, 2020.
[65] Ricky Sanjaya, Jun Wang, and Yaodong Yang.
Measuring the non-transitivity in chess.
Algorithms, 15(5):152, 2022.
[66] Fangwei Zhong, Peng Sun, Wenhan Luo, Tingyun Yan, and Yizhou Wang.
AD-VAT: An
asymmetric dueling mechanism for learning visual active tracking. In International Conference
on Learning Representations, 2019.
[67] Fangwei Zhong, Peng Sun, Wenhan Luo, Tingyun Yan, and Yizhou Wang.
Ad-vat+: An
asymmetric dueling mechanism for learning and understanding visual active tracking. IEEE
Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, 43(5):1467–1482, 2021.
[68] Fangwei Zhong, Peng Sun, Wenhan Luo, Tingyun Yan, and Yizhou Wang. Towards distraction-
robust active visual tracking. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pages 12782–
12792. PMLR, 2021.
[69] Yaodong Yang, Jun Luo, Ying Wen, Oliver Slumbers, Daniel Graves, Haitham Bou Ammar,
Jun Wang, and Matthew E Taylor.
Diverse auto-curriculum is critical for successful real-
world multiagent learning systems. In International Conference on Autonomous Agents and
MultiAgent Systems, pages 51–56, 2021.
[70] Le Cong Dinh, Stephen Marcus McAleer, Zheng Tian, Nicolas Perez-Nieves, Oliver Slumbers,
David Henry Mguni, Jun Wang, Haitham Bou Ammar, and Yaodong Yang. Online double
oracle. Transactions on Machine Learning Research, 2022.
[71] Nicolas Perez-Nieves, Yaodong Yang, Oliver Slumbers, David H Mguni, Ying Wen, and Jun
Wang. Modelling behavioural diversity for learning in open-ended games. In International
Conference on Machine Learning, pages 8514–8524. PMLR, 2021.
[72] Xiangyu Liu, Hangtian Jia, Ying Wen, Yujing Hu, Yingfeng Chen, Changjie Fan, Zhipeng
Hu, and Yaodong Yang. Towards unifying behavioral and response diversity for open-ended
learning in zero-sum games. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:941–952,
2021.
[73] Xidong Feng, Oliver Slumbers, Ziyu Wan, Bo Liu, Stephen McAleer, Ying Wen, Jun Wang,
and Yaodong Yang. Neural auto-curricula in two-player zero-sum games. Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems, 34, 2021.
[74] Bo Liu, Xidong Feng, Haifeng Zhang, Jun Wang, and Yaodong Yang.
Settling the bias
and variance of meta-gradient estimation for meta-reinforcement learning.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2112.15400, 2021.
[75] Kris Cao, Angeliki Lazaridou, Marc Lanctot, Joel Z Leibo, Karl Tuyls, and Stephen Clark.
Emergent communication through negotiation.
In International Conference on Learning
Representations, 2018.
[76] Yoram Bachrach, Richard Everett, Edward Hughes, Angeliki Lazaridou, Joel Z Leibo, Marc
Lanctot, Michael Johanson, Wojciech M Czarnecki, and Thore Graepel. Negotiating team
formation using deep reinforcement learning. Artiﬁcial Intelligence, 288:103356, November
2020.
[77] Diane Bouchacourt and Marco Baroni. Miss tools and mr fruit: Emergent communication in
agents learning about object affordances. arXiv preprint arXiv:1905.11871, 2019.
[78] Abhishek Das, Théophile Gervet, Joshua Romoff, Dhruv Batra, Devi Parikh, Mike Rabbat,
and Joelle Pineau. Tarmac: Targeted multi-agent communication. In International Conference
on Machine Learning, pages 1538–1546. PMLR, 2019.
16

[79] Weichao Qiu, Fangwei Zhong, Yi Zhang, Siyuan Qiao, Zihao Xiao, Tae Soo Kim, Yizhou
Wang, and Alan Yuille. Unrealcv: Virtual worlds for computer vision. In ACM International
Conference on Multimedia, pages 1221–1224, 2017.
17

Checklist
1. For all authors...
(a) Do the main claims made in the abstract and introduction accurately reﬂect the paper’s
contributions and scope? [Yes] We introduce a novel environment as a new benchmark
that is applicable to MSMT tasks and test multi-agent learning algorithms
(b) Did you describe the limitations of your work? [Yes] See Section 6
(c) Did you discuss any potential negative societal impacts of your work? [Yes] See
Section 6
(d) Have you read the ethics review guidelines and ensured that your paper conforms to
them? [Yes]
2. If you are including theoretical results...
(a) Did you state the full set of assumptions of all theoretical results? [N/A]
(b) Did you include complete proofs of all theoretical results? [N/A]
3. If you ran experiments...
(a) Did you include the code, data, and instructions needed to reproduce the main
experimental results (either in the supplemental material or as a URL)? [Yes]
(b) Did you specify all the training details (e.g., data splits, hyperparameters, how they
were chosen)? [Yes]
(c) Did you report error bars (e.g., with respect to the random seed after running
experiments multiple times)? [Yes]
(d) Did you include the total amount of compute and the type of resources used (e.g., type
of GPUs, internal cluster, or cloud provider)? [Yes]
4. If you are using existing assets (e.g., code, data, models) or curating/releasing new assets...
(a) If your work uses existing assets, did you cite the creators? [Yes]
(b) Did you mention the license of the assets? [Yes]
(c) Did you include any new assets either in the supplemental material or as a URL? [Yes]
(d) Did you discuss whether and how consent was obtained from people whose data
you’re using/curating? [Yes]
(e) Did you discuss whether the data you are using/curating contains personally identiﬁ-
able information or offensive content? [N/A]
5. If you used crowdsourcing or conducted research with human subjects...
(a) Did you include the full text of instructions given to participants and screenshots, if
applicable? [N/A]
(b) Did you describe any potential participant risks, with links to Institutional Review
Board (IRB) approvals, if applicable? [N/A]
(c) Did you include the estimated hourly wage paid to participants and the total amount
spent on participant compensation? [N/A]
18
