372
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, VOL. 22, NO. 1, JANUARY 2026
Distributed Robust Dispatch for Networked
Microgrids With Coalition Game-Guided
Multiagent Adversarial Safe
Reinforcement Learning
Tianjiao Pu
, Senior Member, IEEE, Shuai Du
, Lei Dong, Member, IEEE, and Ji Qiao
Abstract—The
integration
of
distributed
energy
re-
sources introduces demand-side ﬂexibility and uncertainty,
challenging dispatch of networked microgrids (MGs). This
article
proposes
a
coalition
game-guided
multiagent
adversarial safe reinforcement learning (SRL) method
to
achieve
distributed
robust
dispatch
under
privacy
protection. Leveraging SRL for rapid decision-making with
safety guarantees, we further overcome the reliance on
predeﬁned source-load distributions inherent in existing
SRL approaches. Speciﬁcally, we employ the Wasserstein
generative
adversarial
network
to
assume
additional
distributional information on source and load transition
probabilities. This unique design for MG dispatch enhances
decision
robustness
under
source-load
ﬂuctuations
compared to existing adversarial training, which gives
adversary the same action space as the protagonist.
To
ensure
privacy-preserving
multiagent
training,
we
construct a coalition game-guided training framework.
This framework adjusts protagonists’ rewards based on
game theory to ensure global convergence only with
MGs’ boundary power, and uses Hash-based message
authentication code to guarantee data integrity. Unlike
existing
multiagent
reinforcement
learning
methods
relying
on
global
critic,
our
method
avoids
sharing
privacy-sensitive local states and actions. Simulations
on a modiﬁed IEEE-123 bus system and an actual power
grid-derived test system validate the effectiveness.
Index Terms—Adversarial safe reinforcement learning,
coalition game-guided multiagent training framework, dis-
tributed robust dispatch, networked microgrids.
Received 29 April 2025; revised 6 August 2025; accepted 11 August
2025. Date of publication 3 October 2025; date of current version 2
January 2026. This work was supported in part by the National Natural
Science Foundation of China under Grant 52277098, in part by the Na-
tional Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant U2066213, and
in part by the Science and Technology Project of State Grid Corporation
of China under Grant 5108-202218280A-2-233-XG. Paper no. TII-25-
2786. (Corresponding author: Shuai Du.)
Tianjiao Pu, Shuai Du, and Ji Qiao are with China Electric Power Re-
search Institute, Beijing 100192, China (e-mail: tjpu@epri.sgcc.com.cn;
dushuai@epri.sgcc.com.cn; qiaoji@epri.sgcc.com.cn).
Lei Dong is with North China Electric Power University, Beijing
100096, China (e-mail: donglei@ncepu.edu.cn).
Digital Object Identiﬁer 10.1109/TII.2025.3609841
I. INTRODUCTION
A
S a critical component of the distribution system (DS),
the microgrid (MG) encompasses a signiﬁcant portion
of distributed energy resources (DERs), including micro gas
turbines (MTs), renewable energy sources (RESs), and energy
storage systems (ESSs). Networked microgrids (NMGs), which
consist of multiple MGs with coordinated energy management,
have become a prevalent conﬁguration. Distributed economic
dispatch for NMGs is an essential strategy for improving overall
economic efﬁciency and facilitating the increased utilization of
renewable energy sources.
As the system scale progressively expands, complexity of
the economic dispatch problem increases correspondingly. To
expedite real-time decision-making and circumvent the need
for global information aggregation, existing model-driven op-
timization approaches predominantly employ fully distributed
methods based on consensus algorithms and focus on privacy
protection [1], [2]. While effective for deterministic scenarios,
these methods face fundamental limitations in addressing the
uncertainty arising from RESs and load. Thus, several stud-
ies have employed uncertainty optimization techniques such
as stochastic optimization (SO) [3], robust optimization (RO)
[4], [5], and distributionally robust optimization (DRO) [6],
[7]. DRO combines the strengths of SO and RO by utilizing
ambiguity sets of probability distributions rather than speciﬁc
distributions, thereby achieving a better tradeoff between ro-
bustness and economic efﬁciency. However, as the network size
and the number of management entities increase, the complexity
of solving the problem escalates, leading to a signiﬁcant increase
in decision-making time.
Reinforcement learning (RL), as a prominent data-driven
approach, leverages the powerful nonlinear ﬁtting capabilities of
deep neural networks to generate policies, signiﬁcantly reducing
decision time through ofﬂine training. It is increasingly being
applied in MG dispatch [8], [9]. Given the communication
challenges within today’s high-dimensional systems, the adop-
tion of multiagent RL (MARL) has become more widespread
[10], [11]. However, RL methods typically incorporate operation
constraints as penalty terms in reward function, which may result
in unsafe decisions. And MARL training still depends on sharing
1941-0050 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artiﬁcial intelligence and similar technologies.
Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html
for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Texas at Arlington. Downloaded on June 27,2026 at 06:36:45 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

PU et al.: DISTRIBUTED ROBUST DISPATCH FOR NMGS WITH COALITION GAME-GUIDED MULTIAGENT ADVERSARIAL SRL
373
states and actions to achieve a global critic, overlooking the
privacy information contained.
The safety requirements associated with the real-world
application of RL have led to the development of safe RL (SRL).
The primary model of SRL is built upon the constrained Markov
decision process (CMDP), which extends traditional Markov
decision process (MDP) by integrating safety constraints that re-
ﬂect real-world conditions. SRL methods update policies within
the CMDP context and guarantee both performance improve-
ment and constraint satisfaction, which have been progressively
applied to the economic dispatch of NMGs. Zhang et al. [12]
presented a multiagent safe policy learning method based on
constrained policy optimization (CPO) for optimal power man-
agement of NMGs. Lu et al. [13] proposed a multiagent SRL
algorithm based on proximal policy optimization (PPO) for
optimizing the energy trading strategy in NMGs. A two-stage
data-driven method with safety model framework was con-
structed in [14] to hierarchically coordinate NMGs. However,
these studies assume predeﬁned probability distributions for
source and load, which inadequately capture their uncertainty
and lack robustness.
In addition to safety, robustness is also a critical requirement
for the practical application of RL. The modeling of robust-
ness typically involves the robust MDP, which directly incor-
porates uncertainty in the elements of the MDP. However, the
robust MDP formulation assumes no distributional information
on elements, which may obtain overly conservative solutions
like RO. Therefore, another more complex formulation, named
as distributionally robust Markov decision process (DR-MDP)
[15], has emerged. DR-MDP assumes uncertainty in the latent
distribution generating the MDP elements. It explicitly encodes
a prior probability distribution and facilitates a better balance
between performance and robustness. To solve the DR-MDP
problem, existing methods usually construct the adversary agent
to model environmental discrepancies, and then alternately opti-
mize the policies of both the adversary and the protagonist until
convergence [16], [17], [18]. However, these methods simply
give adversary the same action space as the protagonist, which
is a generic design for ﬁelds such as robotics and autonomous
driving, but cannot fully consider the source-load uncertainty
in MG dispatch problem. What is more, the protagonists in
these works only use traditional RL. As the adversary ﬁnds the
worst-case scenario, it is necessary to improve the protagonist’s
safety by SRL.
In summary, the existing NMGs dispatch methods have
evolved from model-driven optimization to MARL, and sub-
sequently use SRL for safety. However, existing SRL meth-
ods assume predeﬁned probability distributions for RESs and
load, which inadequately captures source-load uncertainty and
results in insufﬁcient robustness. The adversarial training is
the mainstream method for enhancing robustness, but exist-
ing adversary setup is not suitable for the robust dispatch
under source-load ﬂuctuations. Furthermore, existing MARL
methods rely on global critics by sharing states and ac-
tions of agents, which cannot ensure data security and in-
tegrity. To address these problems, our contributions are as
follows.
1) A distributionally robust adversarial SRL method is
proposed for MG robust dispatch. We propose the dis-
tributionally robust CMDP (DR-CMDP) to bound ac-
tion space with safety constraints and assume additional
distribution on the state transition probability that is
strongly correlated with source-load ﬂuctuation. To solve
the DR-CMDP problem, we construct an adversary agent
to simulate the distribution’s ambiguity set, instead of
using predeﬁned source-load distributions or giving ad-
versary the same action space as the protagonist. By
fully considering the characteristics of MG dispatch to
conﬁgure the adversary, our method is more suitable for
MG dispatch under source-load uncertainty.
2) A coalition game-guided multiagent training framework
is proposed for collaboration of NMGs. This framework
only uses the boundary power of MGs to realize a coali-
tiongameforconvergenceguidance,andusesHash-based
message authentication code (HMAC) to guarantee the
data integrity. Based on the beneﬁt from coalition game,
we adjust agents’ reward functions to guarantee conver-
gence, and propose a gradient penalty method to further
enhance algorithmic performance.
3) Combining the adversarial SRL with the coalition game-
guided framework, a distributed robust dispatch scheme
for NMGs is proposed. It can manage power ﬂexi-
bility and uncertainty of DERs under privacy protec-
tion, without relying on precise mechanistic models or
predictions.
The rest of this article is organized as follows. Section II
presents the proposed multiagent training framework. Sec-
tion III introduces the DR-CMDP formulation. Section IV
proposes the distributionally robust adversarial SRL. Simula-
tions is shown in Section V. Finally, Section VI concludes this
article.
II. COALITION GAME-GUIDED MULTIAGENT FRAMEWORK
The proposed framework is shown in Fig. 1. In order that
MARL converges to Nash equilibrium, rationality and con-
vergence are two desirable properties [19]. The proposed ad-
versarial SRL can meet rationality. To ensure convergence of
multiagent training, we need to further guarantee stability of
the coalition formed by all MGs, which involves satisfying the
following properties.
Property 1 (Superadditivity): Value of disjoint coalitions’
union is no less than the sum of coalitions’ separate values.
Property 2 (Nonempty core): The coalition cannot be further
divided into subcoalitions that enable the participants to gain
more beneﬁt in the core.
Inspired by [20], we employ the mid-market rate (MMR) to
guaranteesuperadditivity,whichsetsthelocalbuyandsellprices
as the average of the superior import and export prices, thereby
incentivizing coalition participants to collaborate. However, the
MMR method alone does not guarantee that all participants will
join the grand coalition. As a solution, the Shapley value method
is used to ensure the nonempty core by allocating beneﬁts based
on marginal contributions.
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Texas at Arlington. Downloaded on June 27,2026 at 06:36:45 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

374
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, VOL. 22, NO. 1, JANUARY 2026
Fig. 1.
Proposed framework.
A. Shapley Value Method
Using cooperative game theory, we deﬁne the value func-
tion vt to represent a coalition’s characteristic. In this work, it
is speciﬁcally deﬁned as the cost reduction achieved through
collaborative optimization
vt(S) = (λb
t −λM,b
t
)

n∈S
[P BB
n,t]
+ + (λs
t −λM,s
t
)

n∈S
[P BB
n,t]
−
(1)
where n denotes MG index, S denotes the set of partial MGs,
λb
t, λs
t denote superior import and export prices. λM,b
t
, λM,s
t
denotelocalbuyandsellpricescomputedbyMMR.P BB
n,t denotes
the active power at boundary busn (BBn) only considering
MGn.
Building upon the aforementioned elements, the Shapley
value method facilitates the allocation of beneﬁts based on
marginal contributions. Assume that a coalition has been formed
among certain participants at time t. When a new participant,
denoted as n, joins the coalition, its marginal contribution is
quantiﬁed as
δn,t(S) = vt(S ∪{n}) −vt(S).
(2)
The beneﬁt that MG n joins the ultimate grand coalition N is
determined as
φn,t(N, vt) =

S⊆N/{i}
S!(N −S −1)!
N!
δn,t(S).
(3)
The allocation of beneﬁts in accordance with φn,t can effec-
tively measure the marginal contributions and ﬁnally uphold the
stability of the coalition. However, the computational complex-
ity of the Shapley value method grows exponentially with the
increase of participants. As an extension, the Aumann-Shapley
(A-S) value method overcomes the above shortcoming and is
often employed as an alternative solution in cases involving
numerous participants.
B. A-S Value Method
The A-S value is a natural combination of average and
marginal cost sharing rules [21]. Each participant’s value is its
marginal contributions averaged over all vectors lP BB
t
, 0 ≤l ≤
1. P BB
t
is the boundary power vector from MGs that participate
Fig. 2.
Interconnected NMGs.
in coalition N. Thus, the beneﬁt is calculated as
φn,t(N, vt) = P BB
n,t
 1
0
∂vt(lP BB
t
)
∂P BB
n,t
dl.
(4)
The numerical calculation of (4) is achieved by discretizing
l into L segments to represent the value function vt, which
is nondifferentiable with respect to P BB
n,t. Thus, the A-S based
solution is calculated using the following discrete form as:
φn,t(N, vt) = P BB
n,t
L

l=1
vt(lP BB
t
/L + ΔP BB
n,t) −vt(lP BB
t
/L)
L · ΔP BB
n,t
.
(5)
By comparing computation times, the threshold in the number
of agents for selecting between the two allocation approaches is
determined. Details are presented in Section V-E.
C. Privacy-Preserving and Coalition Game-Guided
Multiagent Training
After obtaining beneﬁt φn,t, each agent calculates reward
function (23) by incorporating its own operation costs (24) and
the beneﬁts (25). The integration of beneﬁt enables individual
agent training to approximate the global optima. Furthermore, a
gradient penalty method is proposed in (38) based on the beneﬁt
to further enhance algorithmic performance.
In addition to the decomposition of optimization objective,
we also need to handle global power ﬂow constraints. Unlike
model-drivenoptimization,RLdirectlycalculatespowerﬂowby
interacting with the environment after selecting actions in each
training episode. To avoid local data sharing, we decompose
the power ﬂow calculation. As shown in Fig. 2, BB1 is set as
the slack bus of NMGs, while BB2 and BB3 are selected to
balance power of MG2 and MG3 like slack bus. In each training
episode, MG2 and MG3 prioritize power ﬂow calculations,
enabling MG1 to subsequently complete its calculation using
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Texas at Arlington. Downloaded on June 27,2026 at 06:36:45 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

PU et al.: DISTRIBUTED ROBUST DISPATCH FOR NMGS WITH COALITION GAME-GUIDED MULTIAGENT ADVERSARIAL SRL
375
the determined BB2 and BB3 power. Then, MG1 transmits
voltages of BB2 and BB3 to the respective MGs as their BB
reference voltages in the next episode. This process iterates
through training process, ﬁnally achieving voltage consensus
and global convergence.
As mentioned above, the proposed multitraining framework
achieves decomposition of dispatch problem while preventing
exposure of local information. To further ensure data security
and integrity for privacy protection, we incorporate a veriﬁcation
mechanism: HMAC [22]. It can ensure the validity of senders’
identitiesforsecureinformationsourceandchecktheintegrityof
receivedmessagesbeforeeveryepisode’straining.Theproposed
method leverages ofﬂine training, thus compromised training
episodes detected through HMAC can be safely discarded while
retaining previously validated policy updates. This fault-tolerant
characteristic enables training continuity with minimal perfor-
mance degradation.
III. DISTRIBUTIONALLY ROBUST CONSTRAINED MARKOV
DECISION PROCESS FORMULATION
The multiagent optimization has been realized with the frame-
work proposed in Section II. Thus, we only focus on each MG’s
dispatch problem in this section. Let P, Q denote active and
reactive power, E denote ESS energy, V, I denote voltage and
current amplitudes, r, x denote resistance and reactance. The
superscript MT,ESS,BB,PV,D denotes MT, ESS, BB, PV, and
load. Operational constraints are speciﬁed using upper bound
U, lower bound L, and ramp limit R. The subscript includes
t, n, i, ij, representing dispatch time, MG index, bus index, and
branch index. The set Ωn encompasses all buses and branches
in MG n. Then, the dispatch model for MG n can be described
as follows with xn = {P ESS
n,[1,T ], QESS
n,[1,T ], P MT
n,[1,T ], QMT
n,[1,T ]}:
min
xn Fn =
T

t=1
⎧
⎨
⎩

i∈Ωn

ac
i(P MT
i,t )2 + bc
iP MT
i,t + cc
i
	
+λb
t[P BB
n,t]+ + λs
t[P BB
n,t]−
⎫
⎬
⎭(6)
s.t. (∀i, ij ∈Ωn,
∀t ∈[1, T])
P MT,L
i
≤P MT
i,t ≤P MT,U
i
(7)
QMT,L
i
≤QMT
i,t ≤QMT,U
i
(8)
−P MT,R
i
≤P MT
i,t −P MT
i,t−1 ≤P MT,R
i
(9)
EL
i ≤Ei,t ≤EU
i
(10)
P ESS,L
i
≤P ESS
i,t
≤P ESS,U
i
(11)
QESS,L
i
≤QESS
i,t ≤QESS,U
i
(12)

i→h
Pih,t −

j→i
(Pji,t −rjiI2
ji,t)
= P MT
i,t + P ESS
i,t + P PV
i,t −P D
i,t
(13)

i→h
Qih,t

j→i
(Qji,t−xjiI2
ji,t)=QMT
i,t +QESS
i,t −QD
i,t (14)
V 2
i,t −V 2
j,t−2(rijPij,t+xijQij,t)+(r2
ij+x2
ij)I2
ij,t =0
(15)
V 2
i,tI2
ij,t ≥P 2
ij,t + Q2
ij,t
(16)
(V L
i )
2 ≤V 2
i,t ≤(V U
i )
2
(17)
0 ≤I2
ij,t ≤(IU
ij)
2
(18)
P BB,L
i
≤P BB
i,t ≤P BB,U
i
.
(19)
The objective (6) is to minimize MG’s total operation cost,
including the buy cost and generation cost, by controlling the
internal MTs and ESSs. The generation cost is deﬁned as a
quadratic function of the active power, with the coefﬁcients
ac, bc, cc. The constraints include MT constraints (7)–(9), ESS
constraints (10)–(12), DistFlow power ﬂow constraints (13)–
(16), and power ﬂow calculation results constraints (17)–(19).
To reformulate the dispatch model, we propose DR-CMDP
which can be expressed as (s, a, R, C, ρ, p). DR-CMDP com-
bines the advantages of both CMDP and DR-MDP. Compared
to traditional MDP [9], it incorporates the constraint function
C to bound action space with safety constraints, and assumes
additional distributions on state transition probability p to fur-
ther enhance robustness. Formally, p is treated as an uncertain
element, which follows a distribution μ in an ambiguity set. As
a result, the proposed DR-CMDP can be deﬁned as follows.
1) State s: The agent is required to issue dispatch commands
in advance, and to mitigate the potential deviation caused
by inaccurate predictions of photovoltaic (PV) generation
and load demand. Thus, we deﬁne the state s based on the
information available to the agent from the environment
sn,t =
{t, PMT
n,t−1, En,t−1, PPV
n,t−4,. . . , PPV
n,t−1, P D
n,t−4, . . . , P D
n,t−1}.
(20)
In the training process, a dynamic mean and variance of
all experienced states in replay buffer are maintained for
continuous normalization of states.
2) Action a: The action a is consistent with the dispatch
commands in MG
an,t = {P ESS
n,t , QESS
n,t , P MT
n,t , QMT
n,t}.
(21)
Actions are sampled from policy πθ generated by a DNN,
where θ is the DNN’s network parameters to optimize
at ∼πθ(at|st) = DNNθ(st).
(22)
3) Reward Function R: Based on the framework proposed
in Section II, the reward function Rn,t for each agent
consists of two components: 1) the operation cost reward
RF
n,t, which is aligned with the optimization objective
to guide the training process of each agent; and 2) the
coalition contribution reward Rφ
n,t, which reﬂects the
beneﬁts derived from the coalition game and ensures the
convergence of multiagent training
Rn,t = RF
n,t + Rφ
n,t
(23)
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Texas at Arlington. Downloaded on June 27,2026 at 06:36:45 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

376
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, VOL. 22, NO. 1, JANUARY 2026
Fig. 3.
Adversary generates the distribution µ, then successively sam-
ples the probability p and the next state sn,t+1 in order to ﬁnd the
worst-case dispatch scenario.
RF
n,t = −
⎧
⎨
⎩

i∈Ωn

ac
i(P MT
i,t )2 + bc
iP MT
i,t + cc
i
	
+λb
t[P BB
n,t]+ + λs
t[P BB
n,t]−
⎫
⎬
⎭
(24)
Rφ
n,t = φn,t(N, vt).
(25)
4) Constraint Function C: To incorporate the operation con-
straints into SRL, the constraint function C is derived
from the limitations imposed by controllable units and
power ﬂow. As RL can directly calculate power ﬂow
after selecting actions, we only contain the power ﬂow
calculation results constraints (17)–(19) in C, and then it
can be formulated as
xn,t ∈{P MT
i,t , P ESS
i,t , ΔP MT
i,t = P MT
i,t −P MT
i,t−1,
QMT
i,t , QESS
i,t ,Ei,t, Vi,t, Iij,t, PBB
i,t }, ∀i, ij ∈Ωn
(26)
Cn,t =

i,ij∈Ωn
max(0, xn,t/xU
n,t −1)
+ max(0, 1 −xn,t/xL
n,t).
(27)
5) Initial State ρ: Given the deﬁnition of the state s, it is
reasonable to assume a ﬁxed initial state ρ, determined by
the previous day’s actions and environmental conditions.
6) State Transition Probability p: As shown in Fig. 3, we
assume additional distributional information on the tran-
sition probability p and create an adversary agent with
network parameters ϕ to simulate its distribution μ. The
state s and reward R of the adversary agent are identical to
those of the protagonist agent. To simplify the transition
probability, the state sn,t is divided into two components:
s1,n,t and s2,n,t
s1,n,t = {t, P MT
n,t−1, En,t−1, P PV
n,t−4, . . . , P PV
n,t−2,
P D
n,t−4, . . . , P D
n,t−2}
(28)
s2,n,t = {P PV
n,t−1, P D
n,t−1}.
(29)
Then transition probability p(sn,t+1|sn,t, an,t) is determined
by p(s1,n,t+1|sn,t, an,t) and p(s2,n,t+1|sn,t, an,t). As the ac-
tions an,t have been transmitted to the environment at time
t, the elements of s1,n,t+1 are all available from the environ-
ment. Thus, p(s1,n,t+1|sn,t, an,t) = 1. The next time’s PV and
load are only correlated with historical data and are indepen-
dent of the actions, i.e., p(s2,n,t+1|sn,t, an,t) = p(s2,n,t+1|sn,t).
In conclusion, the state transition probability is simpliﬁed to
p(s2,n,t+1|sn,t), and we construct a Wasserstein generative ad-
versarial network with gradient penalty (WGAN-GP) to simu-
late its distribution
s2,n,t+1 ∼p(s2,n,t+1|sn,t) ∼μϕ(p|sn,t)
= WGAN −GPϕ(sn,t).
(30)
The adoption of WGAN as our adversary agent is motivated
by its capability in empirical distribution ﬁtting and the superior-
ity of Wasserstein distance. We leverage GAN’s approximation
capacity to gain empirical distribution from historical data.
Then, the critical design consideration lies in selecting appro-
priate metric between generated distributions and the empirical
distribution. Traditional metrics like KL/JS divergence fail to
provide meaningful results when distributions’ support sets do
not coincide, which is common as the adversary agent will be
updated alternately with the protagonist agent. In contrast, the
Wasserstein distance maintains effectiveness and differentia-
bility regardless of support overlap conditions, and can fully
reﬂect the geometric structures of distributions [23]. These
characteristics are conducive to ﬁnding the worst-case dispatch
scenario.
IV. DISTRIBUTIONALLY ROBUST ADVERSARIAL SRL FOR
ROBUST ECONOMIC DISPATCH
A. Problem Deﬁnition
1) Unconstrained
Loss
Function: Having
endowed
the
agents with the ability to represent policies and perturb transition
models, we are now poised to present an unconstrained version
of adversarial loss function. In the kth episode, the protagonist
agent and the adversary agent are updated by solving a max-min
problem
min
ϕ max
θ
Eμϕ

Eπθ,p∼μϕ
 T

t=0
γtRt

(31)
where γ ∈[0, 1] is a discount coefﬁcient determining the bias
towards the rewards received at different times.
2) Constraints Deﬁnition: Problem (31) is ill-deﬁned due
to the unconstrained nature of the parameterized policy and
transition. To form a well-behaved optimization objective, we
impose constraints to restrict search spaces and ensure conver-
gence, containing policy safety constraint, policy trust region
constraint, and transition Wasserstein distance constraint.
According to (27), the operation constraints are satisﬁed when
C ≤0. To ensure long-term effectiveness, a common approach
is to constrain the expected discounted return
JC(θ) = Eπθ
 T

t=0
γtCt

≤0.
(32)
However, constraints based on expectation only reﬂect the
average risk of the policy whereas ignoring the variance, making
it challenging to differentiate between risky and safe policies.
Thus, our policy safety constraint replaces it with conditional
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Texas at Arlington. Downloaded on June 27,2026 at 06:36:45 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

PU et al.: DISTRIBUTED ROBUST DISPATCH FOR NMGS WITH COALITION GAME-GUIDED MULTIAGENT ADVERSARIAL SRL
377
value at risk (CVaR) with a risk level α
CVaRα
 T

t=0
γtCt

≤0.
(33)
CVaR is the representative risk measure used to analyze the
tails of distributions. Given the cumulative distribution function
(cdf) on the discounted return X = T
t=0 γtCt, CVaR is ob-
tained by calculating the expectation only for the region where
cdf value is above the conﬁdence level 1 −α
CVaRα(X) = E [X |X ≥Icdf(1 −α)]
(34)
where Icdf is the inverse cdf. The CVaR risk measure demon-
strates parameter-dependent characteristics: As α →1, CVaR
degenerates to the conventional expected value. A decreasing
α value indicates heightened focus on tail risk quantiﬁcation.
When α →0, CVaR converges to the upper bound sup(X),
achieving maximum safety margin and robustness at the expense
of economic efﬁciency through overconservatism. Therefore,
α = 0.05 is the most common choice, ensuring probabilistic
security for 95% worst-case scenarios while tolerating extreme
tail events beyond the 5% quantile.
It is essential to ensure that the policy update step remains
sufﬁciently appropriate to enhance training stability. To achieve
this, we impose a constraint on the average Kullback-Leibler
(KL) divergence DKL between the new policy and the old policy,
known as the policy trust region constraint
Eπθ [DKL(πθk−1, πθ)] ≤δ.
(35)
For a valid transition Wasserstein distance constraint set
under predetermined uncertainty, our method assumes access
to samples from a reference dynamics model (30) and bounds
the learned transition in an average ε-Wasserstein ball around
the initial distribution μ0 with Wasserstein distance DW
Eμϕ [DW (μϕ0, μϕ)] ≤ε.
(36)
B. Solution Methodology
1) Updating Protagonist Agent’s Actor Network: It is clear
that the transition Wasserstein distance constraint is indepen-
dent from θ. Given a ﬁxed set of ϕ, the parameters θ can be
updated in the kth episode by solving the subproblem
max
θ
Eπθ
 T

t=0
γtRt

s.t. CVaRα
 T

t=0
γtCt

≤0
Eπθ [DKL(πθk−1, πθ)] ≤δ.
(37)
Based on the trust region optimization framework, the ob-
jective can be reformulated using importance sampling and the
advantagefunction.Thedetailderivationcanbefoundin[24].To
promote sufﬁcient exploration, an additional entropy bonus H is
added as suggested in [25]. Furthermore, we propose a gradient
penalty method to enhance convergence. The disparity in unit
generation costs is the most signiﬁcant factor inﬂuencing the
MT power output, yet the cost coefﬁcients of other MGs remain
unavailable. Therefore, we leverage the beneﬁts derived from
the coalition game to indirectly represent these discrepancies,
and penalize the policy gradient based on the rate of change of
beneﬁt with respect to boundary power (to avoid division by
zero, multiplication is used instead of division). As a result, the
objective function is rewritten as
max
θ
Et
⎡
⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎣
πθ(at|st)
πθk−1(at|st) A
πθk−1
R
(st, at)



advantagefunction



importancesampling
+ χ1 H(πθk−1(·|st))



entropy
−χ2 (φre
k,t −φk−1,t)(P BB
k,t −P BB
k−1,t)ak,t[′P MT
k,t
′]



gradientpenalty
⎤
⎥⎦
(38)
where φre
k,t is the beneﬁt calculated under the assumption that
theremainingMGshaveP BB
k,t = P BB
k−1,t toeliminatetheireffects.
ak,t[′P MT
k,t
′] represents only this action’s gradient information is
retained for penalty. χ1, χ2 are positive coefﬁcients.
To make the CVaR constraint (34) tractable and computation-
ally efﬁcient, we assume X follows a Gaussian distribution to
utilize closed-form (39) as commonly used in [26] and [27]
CVaRα(X) = μ + PDF(Icdf(1 −α))
α
σ
(39)
where μ, σ are the mean and variance of the Gaussian distribu-
tion, pdf(·) is the probability density function (pdf). To get μ, σ,
the square function is deﬁned as
JS(θ) = Eπθ
⎡
⎣
 T

t=0
γtCt
2⎤
⎦.
(40)
Then, the discounted return X follows the Gaussian distri-
bution N(JC(θ), JS(θ) −JC(θ)2), and the policy safety con-
straint can be approximated as:
JC(θ) + pdf(Icdf(1 −α))
α

JS(θ) −JC(θ)2 ≤0
(41)
where JC(θ) and JS(θ) can also be reformulated using impor-
tance sampling and the advantage function.
Finally, CPO [28] provides an effective solution to the equiv-
alent problem, which iteratively solves the problem with linear
approximation on the objective (38) and policy safety constraint
(41), as well as quadratic approximation on the policy trust
region constraint (35). Moreover, we employ domain random-
ization to randomly change MG topology before each episode’s
training while maintaining radial structure, thereby enhancing
the method’s adaptability to diverse topologies.
2) Updating Protagonist Agent’s Critic Network: The critic
network is also constructed as a DNN to approximate state value
function V πθk , which is necessary for calculating advantage
function Aπθk . We employ the generalized advantage estimation
(GAE) for calculation, and use all MGs’ sharing information
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Texas at Arlington. Downloaded on June 27,2026 at 06:36:45 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

378
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, VOL. 22, NO. 1, JANUARY 2026
Fig. 4.
Modiﬁed IEEE-123 system divided into three MGs.
P BB
t
to address the inherent the non-stationarity problem of
multiagent training. Choose A
πθk
R
as an example
ε
πθk
R,t = Rt + γV
πθk
R
(st+1, P BB
t+1) −V
πθk
R
(st, P BB
t
)
(42)
A
πθk
R (st, at, P BB
t
) =
T

t=0
(βγ)tε
πθk
R,t
(43)
where β is the GAE parameter. The critic network is trained to
minimize the square-error loss using gradient descent (GD)
Lcritic =

t

V
πθk
R
(st+1, P BB
t+1) −
T

t=0
γtRt
2
.
(44)
3) Updating Adversary Agent: WGAN-GPs are separately
established for PV and load. The ofﬂine process of the adversary
agent is divided into two stages: pretraining and training.
In the pretraining stage, the adversary agent uses historical
data of PV or load to train WGAN-GP, ensuring that the ini-
tial distribution μ0 generated by WGAN-GP under the initial
parameters ϕ0 is close to the empirical distribution of the real
transition probability obtained from historical data. The initial
parameters ϕ0 serve as the starting point for the iteration process
in the training stage.
It is obvious that the policy safety constraint and policy trust
region constraint are only applied to θ. Therefore, in the training
stage, the adversary is tasked with solving the minimization
problem subject to the transition Wasserstein distance con-
straint. Similar to the protagonist, by employing importance
sampling, advantage function, and entropy, the adversary can
also transform the objective function as follows:
min
ϕ
Et
⎡
⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎣
μϕ(pt|st)
μϕk(pt|st)
pμϕ(st+1|st)
pμϕk (st+1|st) Aμϕk (st, at)



advantagefunction



importancesampling
−χ3 H(μϕk(·|st))H(pμϕk (·|st))



entropy
⎤
⎥⎦
s.t. Et [DW (μϕ0(pt|st), μϕ(pt|st))] ≤ε.
(45)
Algorithm 1: The Proposed Method.
GAE computes the advantage function only using the state s
and the reward R, which are identical for both the protagonist
and the adversary. Thus, there is no need for an additional
critic network when uploading the adversary. Problem (45) can
be effectively solved by optimizing the following Wasserstein
distance-penalized loss function with PPO:
Ladver = Et
 μϕ(pt|st)
μϕk(pt|st)
pμϕ(st+1|st)
pμϕk (st+1|st)Aπθk+1(st, at)
−χ3H(μϕk(·|st))H(pμϕk (·|st))
+χ4 |DW (μϕ0(pt|st), μϕ(pt|st)) −ε|

(46)
where χ3, χ4 are positive coefﬁcients.
Combining the framework proposed in Section II, the
Pseudocode
of
the
proposed
method
is
presented
in
Algorithm 1.
V. NUMERICAL RESULTS
A. IEEE-123 Bus System
To verify the effectiveness of the proposed method, the mod-
iﬁed IEEE-123 bus system, as depicted in Fig. 4, is used for
simulation. The system is divided into three MGs, each consist-
ing of a MT, a PV panel, an ESS, and 4 controllable switches.
NMGs can trade with superior grid at BB1, with the transfer
power not exceeding 600 kW. The dispatch cycle spans 24 h,
divided into 24 time intervals, each with a 1-h time step. The
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Texas at Arlington. Downloaded on June 27,2026 at 06:36:45 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

PU et al.: DISTRIBUTED ROBUST DISPATCH FOR NMGS WITH COALITION GAME-GUIDED MULTIAGENT ADVERSARIAL SRL
379
TABLE I
OPERATION PARAMETERS OF DEVICES
TABLE II
TIME-OF-USE ELECTRICITY PRICES
Fig. 5.
Boxplots of historical data. (a) PV. (b) Load.
device parameters are provided in Table I, while the time-of-use
electricity prices are shown in Table II.
B. Pretraining of Adversary Agent
Before RL training, we pretrain the adversary agents to simu-
late distributions of real PV generation and load demand, which
are sourced from California Independent System Operator [29].
The data are widespread adopted by other power system studies
[30], [31], [32]. The box plots in Fig. 5 depict the variability
in PV and load over the course of one year, with different
MGs selecting varying peak values P peak in Table I. Meanwhile,
the red points in box plots represent outliers, which have been
removed before pretraining to enhance the reliability of the data.
Fig. 6 illustrates the pretraining curves of a) WGAN-GPpv and
b) WGAN-GPload, each including the Wasserstein distance, the
generator loss and the discriminator loss. It is evident that both
WGAN-GPs demonstrate excellent pretraining convergence,
providing reasonable initial parameters ϕ0 for the training stage.
C. Algorithm Comparison
To demonstrate the advantages of the proposed algorithm,
several model-driven optimization methods and RL methods are
selected as benchmarks.
(a)
(b)
Fig. 6.
Pre-training results of WGAN-GPs: (a) PV and (b) load.
TABLE III
COMPARISON AMONG DIFFERENT METHODS
1) Comparison With Model-Based Methods: Select second-
order cone programming (SOCP), distributed model predictive
control (DMPC) with 4 h optimization horizon, and DRO as
benchmarks. Three dispatching cases are set for comparison.
Case I: Dispatch under the initial scenario jointly generated by
untrained adversary agents without ﬂuctuation.
Case II: Dispatch under the worst-case scenario jointly gener-
ated by well-trained adversary agents without ﬂuctuation.
Case III: Dispatch and training under the scenario of Case I,
assuming actual PV generation and load ﬂuctuate to match
the worst-case scenario of Case II after real-time decision-
making.
The results are shown in Table III. Although SOCP can yield
relatively lower optimal solutions in both Cases I and II, its
dispatch decisions lead to power shortages when actual source
and load ﬂuctuate like Cases III. These shortages can only be
mitigated by costly purchases from the superior grid, resulting
in a higher total cost.
DMPC possesses feedback correction capability, enabling the
utilization of real-time data to adjust source-load prediction
results, thereby enhancing accuracy. In Case III, it demonstrates
lower optimization costs compared to SOCP. By decomposing
the global problem and employing rolling horizon optimization,
DMPC reduces solution time despite requiring iterations for co-
ordination. However, as deterministic optimization, its decision
accuracy remains dependent on source-load prediction, which
still reduces robustness.
DRO,asamainstreamuncertaintyoptimizationmethod,mod-
els RESs and load as stochastic variables. Through construct-
ing ambiguity sets of their probability distributions based on
historical data, it considers source-load ﬂuctuations by select-
ing the worst-case distribution under chance constraints. This
method eliminates reliance on prediction while achieving high
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Texas at Arlington. Downloaded on June 27,2026 at 06:36:45 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

380
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, VOL. 22, NO. 1, JANUARY 2026
TABLE IV
PERFORMANCE OF METHODS UNDER DIFFERENT PREDICTION ERRORS
(a)
(b)
Fig. 7.
Training performance, including (a) operation costs and (b)
constraint violations (CVs) calculated based on constraint function C.
robustness. However, the introduction of stochastic variables
andchanceconstraintssigniﬁcantlyincreasesmodelcomplexity,
resulting in prolonged computation time.
In contrast, the proposed method shifts the majority of the
computational burden to ofﬂine training and constructs adver-
sary agents based on DR-CMDP to account for the source-load
uncertainty. Similarly prediction-independent, it attains robust-
ness comparable to DRO while substantially reducing online
decision time.
Furthermore, we compare various degrees of prediction errors
in Table IV. It is observed that at a prediction error of 6%, our
method already exhibits better performance. In scenarios, which
require lower robustness, the radius of the ambiguity set can be
decreased, allowing our algorithm to outperform SOCP even
under smaller prediction errors.
2) Comparison With RL Methods: Select PPO, PPO-Lag,
multiagent soft actor-critic (MASAC), MASAC-Lag, and ﬁrst
order constrained optimization in policy space (FOCOPS) as
benchmarks. Compare the training performance and practical
implementation effectiveness in Case III. Results are shown in
Fig. 7 and Table V, respectively.
Traditional RL methods PPO and MASAC introduce opera-
tion constraints as penalty terms in the reward function, which
provides limited constraint enforcement. Thus, these methods
often violate constraints during training to enhance performance
and frequently lead to constraint violations (CVs) in practical
implementation.
SRL methods PPO-Lag, MASAC-Lag, and FOCOPS aim to
learn policies that minimum operation costs while satisfying
safety constraints. Although these methods exhibit relatively
low CVs compared to RL, there still exist CVs. Furthermore,
these methods assume that source and load follow predeﬁned
TABLE V
PRACTICAL EFFECTIVENESS OF DIFFERENT RL METHODS
(a)
(b)
Fig. 8.
Training results, including (a) rewards and (b) Wasserstein
distance.
(a)
(b)
Fig. 9.
Training results of different seasons, including (a) rewards dur-
ing training and (b) the worst-case scenarios generated by well-trained
adversaries.
distributions, resulting in insufﬁcient decision robustness under
source-load ﬂuctuations in practical implementation.
TheproposedmethodemploysCVaRconstrainedSRLtotrain
the protagonist while constructing adversary to simulate the
distribution characteristics of source-load ﬂuctuations, which
guarantee both safety and robustness. The lowest cost without
CV in Case III veriﬁes its advantages, and the comparison with
its non-CVaR implementation demonstrates the effectiveness of
the CVaR constraint.
D. Training Performance and Operation Outcomes
The training results are presented in Fig. 8. Fig. 8(a) shows
the training curves of overall reward under three conditions: 1)
alternately training the protagonist and the adversary, 2) training
the protagonist alone, and 3) training the adversary alone. The
protagonist works to increase the reward, whereas the adversary
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Texas at Arlington. Downloaded on June 27,2026 at 06:36:45 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

PU et al.: DISTRIBUTED ROBUST DISPATCH FOR NMGS WITH COALITION GAME-GUIDED MULTIAGENT ADVERSARIAL SRL
381
(a)
(b)
Fig. 10.
Effectiveness of the proposed framework, including (a) effec-
tiveness of the coalition game-based guidance theory and (b) the data
integrity ensurance.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Fig. 11.
Optimization results of daily dispatch, including (a) networked
MGs, (b) MG1, (c) MG2, and (d) MG3.
Fig. 12.
Optimization results of system voltage. Voltage amplitudes are
maintained at [0.968, 1.050] p.u.
aims to minimize the reward in search of the worst-case dis-
patch scenario. Fig. 8(b) illustrates the Wasserstein distance of
the adversary, indicating that both WGAN-GPs can ensure the
transition Wasserstein distance constraint.
The adversary agents trained above are pretrained using a
full year’s source and load data. To further demonstrate the
TABLE VI
PERFORMANCE OF METHODS UNDER DIFFERENT TOPOLOGIES
method’s adaptability to seasonal variations in RESs and load,
we conduct separate pretraining and training sessions using data
from each season. The training results shown in Fig. 9(a), and
the worst-case scenarios generated by adversaries are presented
in Fig. 9(b). It is obvious that the method can handle ﬂuctuations
in energy availability due to seasonal changes.
To validate the effectiveness of the coalition game-guided
multiagent framework, we train agents without coalition game
guidance as a control group in Fig. 10(a). The ablation study
conﬁrms that removing the guidance leads to degraded training
convergence, including slower convergence rate and worse ﬁnal
reward. Furthermore, to verify the convergence of multiagent
training under HMAC veriﬁcation, we assume that HMAC de-
tects data corruption once every 10 training episodes. Fig. 10(b)
indicates that the compromised training episodes can be safely
discarded, ensuring the data integrity.
Randomly select a worst-case scenario for daily dispatch
veriﬁcation. The results for a) networked MGs, b) MG1, c)
MG2, and d) MG3 are exhibited in Fig. 11. It is assumed
that the costs associated with PV generation and ESSs are
negligible, and the unit generation cost of MG1 is more eco-
nomical than that of the other MGs. Speciﬁc price parameters
are detailed in Table I. As a result, when the load exceeds
the PV generation, the networked MGs prioritize meeting the
demand by ﬁrst utilizing PV and ESSs, followed by the MT
of MG1, and ﬁnally addressing any deﬁcits through the MT of
MG2 or by procuring additional power from the superior grid.
On the other hand, when PV generation exceeds the load, the
excess energy is ﬁrst used to meet demand and charge the ESSs.
Any remaining surplus electricity is sold to superior grid for
proﬁt.
The voltage amplitudes of all three MGs are shown in Fig. 12,
which further veriﬁes the safety of the proposed method.
To validate the algorithm’s performance under topological
variations, we conducted tests on 5 randomly selected radial
topologies without retraining. Table VI shows that the proposed
method achieves safe and robust decision-making, even when
confronted with network reconﬁgurations.
E. Scalability Tests
We construct a 716-bus test MG based on a practical system
shown in Fig. 13, and increase controllable units by conﬁguring
5 MTs and 5 ESSs. A test system comprising 6 such MGs is
established to validate the scalability of our algorithm in larger-
scale networks with more agents and controllable units.
To determine when to employ the A-S value method, we
compare computation times under varying numbers of agents.
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Texas at Arlington. Downloaded on June 27,2026 at 06:36:45 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

382
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, VOL. 22, NO. 1, JANUARY 2026
Fig. 13.
716-bus test MG.
(a)
(b)
Fig. 14.
Results of (a) time comparison and (b) training performance.
TABLE VII
PERFORMANCE OF METHODS UNDER DIFFERENT TEST SYSTEMS
Using the time of A-S method with 2 agents as the baseline, the
comparison results in Fig. 14(a) demonstrate that the time of the
Shapley method increases signiﬁcantly faster when the number
reaches 6 or more. Consequently, we adopted A-S value method
to reduce computation time in such conditions.
The training performance of the proposed method in the
4296-bus system is shown in Fig. 14(b), while its practical
decision-making outcomes are summarized in Table VII. The
results indicate that the proposed method maintains safe and
robust performance even in more complex systems.
VI. CONCLUSION
In this article, a distributed economic dispatch method for
NMGs is proposed to deal with DERs’ ﬂexibility, operation
constraints, and source-load uncertainty under privacy protec-
tion. For each MG, a distributionally robust adversarial SRL
methodisproposed.WeemployCVaRconstrainedSRLtosafely
train the protagonist while constructing adversary to assume
additional distributional information on the state transition prob-
ability, which is strongly correlated with source-load ﬂuctuation.
By fully considering the source-load uncertainty to conﬁgure the
adversary, our method is more suitable for MG robust dispatch.
To realize multiagent convergence under privacy protection, a
coalition game-guided training framework is constructed with
HMAC. The coalition game ensures stability of NMGs only
using boundary power, and the HMAC guarantee data integrity
for complete privacy protection. The numerical results verify the
effectiveness. However, the framework’s dependence on accu-
rate historical data for WGAN-GP pretraining and its scalability
to larger network considering the hierarchical structure of actual
DS are still limited. Future research directions should incor-
porate hierarchical coordination mechanisms with distribution
system operators to address these limitations.
REFERENCES
[1] W. Chen, Z. Wang, H. Dong, J. Mao, and G.-P. Liu, “Privacy-preserving
distributed economic dispatch of microgrids over directed networks via
State decomposition: A fast consensus algorithm,” IEEE Trans. Ind. In-
form., vol. 20, no. 3, pp. 4092–4102, Mar. 2024.
[2] W. Fu, Y. Gao, Y. Zhang, S. Hu, and Y. Huang, “A distributed time-varying
inherentprivacy-preservingconsensusalgorithmforintegratedenergysys-
tems,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Inform., vol. 21, no. 2, pp. 1180–1189, Feb. 2025,
doi: 10.1109/TII.2024.3475418.
[3] K. Vemalaiah, D. Khatod, and N. Padhy, “Synergistic day-ahead schedul-
ing framework for smart distribution grid under uncertainty,” IEEE Trans.
Ind. Inform., vol. 20, no. 7, pp. 9681–9691, Jul. 2024.
[4] A. Rajaei, S. Fattaheian-Dehkordi, M. Fotuhi-Firuzabad, M. Moeini-
Aghtaie, and M. Lehtonen, “Developing a distributed robust energy Man-
agement framework for active distribution systems,” IEEE Trans. Sustain.
Energy, vol. 12, no. 4, pp. 1891–1902, Oct. 2021.
[5] X.Li,L.Ding,andZ.Kong,“Distributedrobustlow-carbonoptimalenergy
management in islanded microgrids,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Inform., vol. 20,
no. 7, pp. 9803–9813, Jul. 2024.
[6] Y. Wen, Z. Hu, X. Chen, Z. Bao, and C. Liu, “Centralized distributionally
robust chance-constrained dispatch of integrated transmission-distribution
systems,” IEEE Trans. Power Syst., vol. 39, no. 2, pp. 2947–2959,
Mar. 2024.
[7] L. Li, C. Ning, H. Qiu, W. Du, and Z. Dong, “Online data-stream-driven
distributionally robust optimal energy management for hydrogen-based
multimicrogrids,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Inform., vol. 20, no. 3, pp. 4370–4384,
Mar. 2024.
[8] S. Saﬁri, A. Nikoofard, M. Khosravy, and T. Senjyu, “Multi-agent
distributed reinforcement learning algorithm for free-model economic-
environmental power and CHP dispatch problems,” IEEE Trans. Power
Syst., vol. 38, no. 5, pp. 4489–4500, Sep. 2023.
[9] C. Mu et al., “Multi-objective interval optimization dispatch of microgrid
via deep reinforcement learning,” IEEE Trans. Smart Grid, vol. 15, no. 3,
pp. 2957–2970, May 2024.
[10] S. Liu, S. Han, and S. Zhu, “Reinforcement learning-based energy trading
and management of regional interconnected microgrids,” IEEE Trans.
Smart Grid, vol. 14, no. 3, pp. 2047–2059, May 2023.
[11] Y. Wang, M. Xiao, Y. You, and H. V. Poor, “Optimized energy dispatch for
microgrids with distributed reinforcement learning,” IEEE Trans. Smart
Grid, vol. 15, no. 3, pp. 2946–2956, May 2024.
[12] Q. Zhang, K. Dehghanpour, Z. Wang, F. Qiu, and D. Zhao, “Multi-agent
safe policy learning for power management of networked microgrids,”
IEEE Trans. Smart Grid, vol. 12, no. 2, pp. 1048–1062, Mar. 2021.
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Texas at Arlington. Downloaded on June 27,2026 at 06:36:45 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

PU et al.: DISTRIBUTED ROBUST DISPATCH FOR NMGS WITH COALITION GAME-GUIDED MULTIAGENT ADVERSARIAL SRL
383
[13] R. Lu et al., “SMA-PDPPO: Safe multiagent primal-dual deep reinforce-
ment learning for industrial parks energy trading,” IEEE Trans. Ind.
Inform., vol. 21, no. 3, pp. 2640–2649, Mar. 2025.
[14] Y. Xia, Y. Xu, and X. Feng, “Hierarchical coordination of networked-
microgrids toward decentralized operation: A safe deep reinforce-
ment learning method,” IEEE Trans. Sustain. Energy, vol. 15, no. 3,
pp. 1981–1993, Jul. 2024.
[15] H. Xu and S. Mannor, “Distributionally robust Markov decision pro-
cesses,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2010, Art. no. 23.
[16] L. Pinto et al., “Robust adversarial reinforcement learning,” in Proc. Int.
Conf. Mach. Learn., 2017, pp. 2817–2826.
[17] P. Huang et al., “Robust reinforcement learning as a Stackelberg game via
adaptively-regularized adversarial training,” in Proc. 31st Int. Joint Conf.
Artif. Intell., 2022, pp. 3099–3106.
[18] Z. Zhang et al., “Robust deep reinforcement learning in robotics via
adaptive gradient-masked adversarial attacks,” 2025, arXiv:2503.20844.
[19] M.BowlingandM.Veloso,“Rationalandconvergentlearninginstochastic
games,” in Proc. 17th Int. Joint Conf. Artif. Intell., 2001, pp. 1021–1026.
[20] S. Nikkhah, A. Allahham, M. Royapoor, J. W. Bialek, and D. Giaouris,
“Optimising building-to-building and building-for-grid services under un-
certainty: A robust rolling horizon approach,” IEEE Trans. Smart Grid,
vol. 13, no. 2, pp. 1453–1467, Mar. 2022.
[21] Q. Zhou, M. Shahidehpour, T. Sun, D. Feng, and M. Yan, “Cooperative
game for carbon obligation allocation among distribution system operators
to incentivize the proliferation of renewable energy,” IEEE Trans. Smart
Grid, vol. 10, no. 6, pp. 6355–6365, Nov. 2019.
[22] H. Krawczyk, R. Canetti, and M. Bellare, “HMAC: Keyed-hashing for
message authentication,” RFC 2104, Internet Engineering Task Force,
Feb. 1997.
[23] V. Panaretos and Y. Zemel, “Statistical aspects of Wasserstein distances,”
Annu. Rev. Statist. Appl., vol. 6, no. 1, 2019, Art. no. 12663.
[24] J. Schulman et al., “Trust region policy optimization,” Comput. Sci., vol.
9, pp. 1889–1897, 2015.
[25] J. Schulman et al., “Proximal policy optimization algorithms,” 2017,
arXiv:1707.06347.
[26] Y. Tang, J. Zhang, and R. Salakhutdinov, “Worst cases policy gradients,”
in Proc. Conf. Robot Learn., 2020, pp. 1078–1093.
[27] D. Kim and S. Oh, “TRC: Trust region conditional value at risk for
safe reinforcement learning,” IEEE Robot. Autom. Lett., vol. 7, no. 2,
pp. 2621–2628, Apr. 2022.
[28] J. Achiam, D. Held, A. Tamar, and P. Abbeel, “Constrained policy opti-
mization,” in Proc. 34th Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2017, pp. 22–31.
[29] OASIS, “California ISO open access same-time information system,”
(n.d.). [Online]. 2025. Available: http://oasis.caiso.com
[30] H. Li and H. He, “Learning to operate distribution networks with safe
deep reinforcement learning,” IEEE Trans. Smart Grid, vol. 13, no. 3,
pp. 1860–1872, May 2022.
[31] N. Costilla-Enriquez, M. A. Ortega-Vazquez, A. Tuohy, A. Motley, and
R. Webb, “Operating dynamic reserve dimensioning using probabilistic
forecasts,” IEEE Trans. Power Syst., vol. 38, no. 1, pp. 603–616, Jan. 2023.
[32] E. Samani, M. Kohansal, and H. Mohsenian-Rad, “A data-driven conver-
gence bidding strategy based on reverse engineering of market partici-
pants’ performance: A case of California ISO,” IEEE Trans. Power Syst.,
vol. 37, no. 3, pp. 2122–2136, May 2022.
Tianjiao Pu (Senior Member, IEEE) received
the M.S. degree in electrical engineering from
Tianjin University, Tianjin, China, in 1997.
He is a Doctoral Supervisor and Professorate
Senior Engineer. He is the Director with the Arti-
ﬁcial Intelligence Application Research Depart-
ment, China Electric Power Research Institute,
a Fellow of IET, a Senior Member of IEEE, a
Senior Member of CSEE, Vice-Chairman and
Secretary General of the Artiﬁcial Intelligence
Committee of CSEE, and the Deputy Editor-in-
Chief of IET Smart Grid. He is currently with China Electric Power
Research Institute. His research interests include research and man-
agement of power dispatching automation, smart grid simulation, active
distribution network, artiﬁcial intelligence, and other ﬁelds.
Shuai Du received the B.S. degree in electrical
engineering from North China Electric Power
University, Beijing, China, in 2020. He is cur-
rently working toward the Ph.D. degree in power
system automation with China Electric Power
Research Institute, Beijing, China.
His research interests include the applica-
tions of reinforcement learning in optimization
dispatch of active distribution network.
Lei Dong (Member, IEEE) received the M.S.
degree in electrical engineering and automation
from Tianjin University, Tianjin, China, in 1996.
She is currently an Associate Professor and
master supervisor with School of Electrical and
Electronic Engineering, North China Electric
Power University, China. Her research inter-
ests include power system analysis and control,
power system optimal dispatch and operation
control, and application of artiﬁcial intelligence
in power system.
Ji Qiao received the Ph.D. degree in electrical
engineering from Tsinghua University, Beijing,
China, in 2018.
He is currently with the China Electric Power
Research Institute, Beijing, China. His research
interests include Big Data and AI applications in
power system analysis and operation.
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Texas at Arlington. Downloaded on June 27,2026 at 06:36:45 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
