Tractable Equilibrium Computation in Markov Games through
Risk Aversion
Eric Mazumdar∗†
Caltech
Kishan Panaganti∗‡
Caltech
Laixi Shi∗‡
Caltech
August 28, 2024
Abstract
A significant roadblock to the development of principled multi-agent reinforcement learning is the
fact that desired solution concepts like Nash equilibria may be intractable to compute. To overcome this
obstacle, we take inspiration from behavioral economics and show that—by imbuing agents with important
features of human decision-making like risk aversion and bounded rationality—a class of risk-averse
quantal response equilibria (RQE) become tractable to compute in all n-player matrix and finite-horizon
Markov games. In particular, we show that they emerge as the endpoint of no-regret learning in suitably
adjusted versions of the games. Crucially, the class of computationally tractable RQE is independent of
the underlying game structure and only depends on agents’ degree of risk-aversion and bounded rationality.
To validate the richness of this class of solution concepts we show that it captures peoples’ patterns of
play in a number of 2-player matrix games previously studied in experimental economics. Furthermore,
we give a first analysis of the sample complexity of computing these equilibria in finite-horizon Markov
games when one has access to a generative model and validate our findings on a simple multi-agent
reinforcement learning benchmark.
Keywords: behavioral economics, risk-aversion, multi-agent reinforcement learning, quantal response,
bounded rationality.
1
Introduction
Machine learning algorithms are increasingly being deployed in dynamic environments in which they interact
with other agents like people or other algorithms. Often, these agents have their own goals which may not be
aligned with those of the algorithm—making the interactions strategic. Such situations are naturally modeled
as games between rational agents and their prevalence in a wide range of application areas has driven a
surge in research interest in learning in games [13] and multi-agent reinforcement learning [76] in recent years.
Indeed, real-world applications of these problems range from the training of large language models [50] to the
decentralized control of the smart grid [48], autonomous driving [39], and financial trading [72] among many
others.
When viewed through the lens of game-theory, many of these problems can be cast as problems of
equilibrium computation under varying information structures, where the equilibrium represents a stable
outcome for rational agents. The most common equilibrium concept is that of a Nash equilibrium (NE) [51]:
a solution under which no rational agent has an incentive to unilaterally seek to improve their outcome.
Despite its popularity as a solution concept, computing a NE outside of highly structured games is known to
be computationally intractable [14] even for two-player matrix games.
While relaxations of NE like (coarse) correlated equilibria (CCE) are known to be more tractable to
compute, they also have their limitations. Indeed while CCE can be computed through the use of no-regret
∗Author list is in alphabetical order.
†Department of Computing Mathematical Sciences and Department of Economics, California Institute of Technology, CA
91125, USA.
‡Department of Computing Mathematical Sciences, California Institute of Technology, CA 91125, USA.
1
arXiv:2406.14156v2  [cs.GT]  27 Aug 2024

Figure 1:
The shaded blue region depicts the regime of risk-aversion and bounded rationality preferences
that allow for computationally tractable RQE in all 2-player games as shown in Theorem 3. The markers
GHP: Game 4 [28] and SC: Game 1-12 [59] represent the necessary parameter values required to recreate the
average strategy played by people in various 2-player games in observational data up to 1% accuracy.
learning algorithms [13], the set of CCE can be large (introducing an additional problem of equilibrium
selection) and may include strictly dominated strategies [70] which means that they cannot necessarily be
rationalized by individual agents [17]. Furthermore, a refinement of CCE—stationary CCE— are also known
to be PPAD-hard to compute in dynamic general-sum games [16].
Beyond these hardness results, solution concepts like NE and CCE also fail to be predictive of what
strategies people play in games [18,44], with people being observed to be imperfect optimizers [11,27] and
risk-averse [28] when confronted with game theoretic scenarios. This aligns with celebrated work in behavioral
economics and mathematical psychology which has repeatedly shown that dominant features of human
decision-making are a failure to perfectly optimize [42] and risk-aversion [37,69].
The first observation is often referred to as bounded rationality which posits that individuals are naturally
prone to making mistakes and often fail to be perfectly optimal [42]. This is often captured in games through
the idea of a quantal response equilibrium (QRE) [44].
The second observation can be attributed to the fact that players typically face uncertainty and risk in
their decisions, stemming from environmental uncertainties like unknown future events, noise, or even other
players’ lack of optimality. The presence of these uncertainties can lead people to prefer risk-averse strategies,
i.e., strategies which give more certain outcomes at the cost of lower expected returns [30]. Interestingly,
there is evidence that neither of these properties alone can account for people’s patterns of play observed in
controlled experiments [28,29], and that models of decision-making that incorporate both of these features
have the best predictive power [28].
Motivated by these findings, in this paper we formulate and study games in which agents are risk-averse
and have bounded rationality and study the computational tractability of the natural equilibrium concept in
this class of games: a risk-averse quantal response equilibrium (RQE). At first glance, the introduction of
these features of human decision-making into games can break existing game theoretic structures. However,
by relying on dual formulations of risk we show how, for a large range of degrees of risk-aversion and
bounded rationality, RQE are computationally tractable in all n-player matrix games. Crucially, the class of
computationally tractable RQE is independent of the original game structure and depends only on players’
degrees of risk aversion and bounded rationality. We then extend the result to finite-horizon Markov games in
which agents interact in a Markov decision process (MDP) and provide a finite-sample complexity guarantee
on how many samples one would need to approximate a RQE in Markov games.
2

These results suggest that designing multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) agents with realistic
features of human decision-making can allow for a computationally tractable equilibrium concept in all finite
action games and finite horizon Markov games. To emphasize the practical relevance of this theoretical result,
we show how that the regime for which RQE are computationally tractable captures real-world data from
behavioral economics on people’s observed pattern of play in 13 different games. This is illustrated in Fig. 1,
where the blue region represents the set of RQE that are computationally tractable which is a function of
agents’ degree of risk-aversion (τ1/τ2), and level of bounded rationality (ϵ1/ϵ2).
Contributions:
To begin, in Section 2 we focus on multi-player general-sum matrix games. We first
introduce risk-aversion into matrix games by allowing agents to be risk-averse to the randomness introduced
into the game by their opponents. To incorporate risk-aversion we make use of a general class of convex
risk measures and present two forms of risk aversion: aggregate risk-aversion and action-dependent risk
aversion—with the latter yielding less conservative solutions at the cost of a more complex formulation and
analysis. Given this setup, we show that risk-averse Nash equilibria must exist in both formulations in all
games and for any convex measures of risk.
We then introduce bounded rationality into the games by assuming that agents optimize over quantal
responses instead of the entire probability simplex. In Section 3 we show that computing the QRE of both
types of risk-averse matrix games—i,e., the RQE described above—can be done in polynomial time as long as
the level of risk-aversion and class of quantal response functions satisfies certain conditions. Importantly,
these conditions are independent of the underlying game and only depend on the class of risk metrics and
quantal responses under consideration. Thus, RQE not only incorporates features of human decision-making
but are also more amenable to computation than QRE or NE in matrix games.
In Section 4, we extend the study to multi-player general-sum Markov games. In this setting we consider
the case in which players are risk-averse not only to the randomness introduced by their opponents, but
also to the randomness in the environment. We again show that RQE can be computed efficiently when the
environment is known and one has full information over the game. In addition, we consider the multi-agent
reinforcement learning setting in which the environment is unknown and one needs to learn by sampling.
We provide a first algorithm and a finite-sample guarantee for learning an approximate RQE in such MARL
problems. Finally, we conduct experiments of the dynamic games in gridworlds to illustrate the effect of
risk-aversion in sequential games and validate our findings.
1.1
Related Works
Before presenting our results, we put our work into context, and discuss related works here.
Computational tractability of game theoretic solution concepts.
This work proposes a new solution
concept for game theoretic settings that is computationally tractable, yet retains many of the desirable
properties of classical equilibrium concepts. This general question emerged from the finding that computing
a Nash equilibrium—perhaps the most natural solution concept for a game between rational self-interested
agents—is PPAD-hard [14], even for two-player general-sum matrix games. Despite this negative result, a
large amount of subsequent work has focused on understanding the classes of games in which one can compute,
approximate, or learn Nash equilibria efficiently. This is often done by assuming additional structure on
the players’ utilities and their relationships to one another, with large classes of games being zero-sum or
competitive games, zero-sum polymatrix games [10,38], monotone games [31], smooth games [57], or socially
concave games [21].
In games without such structure however, the natural targets for computation and learning became
correlated [49] and coarse correlated equilibria
[4, 5](CE and CCE respectively), both of which can be
shown to emerge as the endpoint of no-regret learning and are thus considered to be computationally
tractable targets for the design of learning algorithms. Despite this desirable property, the two concepts
have significant drawbacks. Indeed both CE and CCE require some form of coordination between players
to implement, introduce a highly nontrivial equilibrium selection problem [13], and may have support on
dominated strategies [70]. Furthermore, in the dynamic game context of Markov games, stationary CE and
CCE are also computationally intractable to compute [16].
3

More recently, a new equilibrium concept—a smoothed Nash equilibrium— has been proposed as an
alternative to these other equilibrium concepts [15] and motivated by similar considerations of individual and
independent rationalizability and computational tractability. By applying ideas from smoothed analysis to
the problem of computing Nash equilibria the authors show that one can efficiently find approximate classes
of smoothed Nash equilibria—though to the best of our knowledge this cannot be done in a decentralized way.
Our approach is orthogonal and is rooted in giving MARL agents a foundation rooted in behavioral
economics by imbuing them with a realistic feature of human decision-making: risk-aversion. The question of
computational tractability of risk-averse Nash equilibria has been analyzed in [22]. The work shows that if
agents are risk-averse with respect to all the randomness in the game (including their own) then a risk-averse
Nash equilibrium may not even exist in mixed strategies, and even understanding if such equilibria exist can
be NP-complete. Our formulation overcomes this by incorporating risk-aversion in a different way. Indeed,
we show that when agents are risk-averse only to the randomness introduced to their opponents (and the
environment) then the risk-averse Nash equilibria will always exist. We note that such formulations of
risk-aversion are common in the literature on risk-sensitive control [8,62] and risk-sensitive reinforcement
learning [63] where agents are implicitly presumed to be risk-averse only to the randomness that is outside
their control (i.e., the environment). Furthermore we show that introducing bounded rationality into the
game allows a class of risk-averse quantal response equilibria (RQE) to be computationally tractable in all
finite action and finite-horizon Markov games.
Predictive power of equilibrium concepts.
Another driving force in moving beyond the Nash and
correlated equilibrium concepts stems from their lack of predictive power in experimental settings (see e.g.,
[9,18,43,44,52]). To address this, a line of work originating in economics seeks to understand the natural
solution concepts in game where players have behaviorally plausible restrictions to their strategy spaces,
and to study whether such equilibria were better predictors of human play than Nash or (coarse) correlated
equilibria [28,29,33]. The most common restriction is that players have bounded rationality,—i.e., they may
fail to perfectly optimize—a model with roots in mathematical psychology [42]. Under this restriction, a
natural equilibrium concept that emerged was that of a quantal response equilibrium (QRE) which induces
bounded rationality by either assuming that the players are rational in a stochastically perturbed version of
the game or equivalently that they optimize a regularized version of their utility [44,45,47]. Beyond their
use as a better model for human decision-making in games, QRE have also increasingly been adopted as
a solution concept in multi-agent reinforcement learning and learning in games [12, 20, 35, 41, 47, 68] due
to their links with KL and entropy regularized reinforcement learning. Despite these developments QRE
are not computable in all games. Indeed the class of QRE or equivalently the level of bounded rationality
needed for computational tractability depends on the underlying game structure which may not be known a
priori. In contrast we show that the addition of risk aversion allows for the same class of quantal response
equilibria to be computationally tractable to compute in all finite action games and finite-horizon Markov
games. Furthermore we show that this class of risk-averse QRE is nontrivial and can capture human data
better than risk-neutral QRE—a finding which is in line with findings in behaviorial economics [28,29].
Risk-averse and robust multi-agent reinforcement learning.
Our work builds on and provides an
additional justification for risk-sensitive (multi-agent) reinforcement learning. This line of work has roots
going back to seminal work by Jacobson on risk-sensitive control [36], and more recently in risk-sensitive
reinforcement learning [63]. In these works, the aim is to find a controller or policy for a system that accounts
for stochasticity or uncertainty in the environment or system in a more nuanced way than risk-neutral
approaches like optimal control or reinforcement learning [8]. Due to classic duality results (see e.g., [77])
this line of work is closely related to the literature on robust control and distributionally robust reinforcement
learning [34,53,64,73] which seeks to find solutions that are robust to worst case environmental disturbances.
Our work rigorously extends these formulations to the multi-agent regime though it is not the first to
consider risk-aversion in MARL. Indeed, risk-sensitive MARL has been the focus of several recent works
(e.g., [25,67,71,74]). Several provide rigorous definitions of risk-averse equilibria and some guarantees on their
computation by assuming structure on the risk-adjusted game. Oftentimes this is done by assuming that
the risk-adjusted game is itself zero-sum [74], monotone [71], or that it satisfies other strong conditions [25].
Other works are more empirical in nature [19,24,55,61,67,78], showing the promise of risk-averse algorithms
for MARL.
4

One last closely related line of work is the emerging literature on robust multi-agent reinforcement
learning [7,32,66,75]. Once again due to duality arguments, these works can be seen as tackling a similar
problem to the risk-averse MARL problem. The focus of these previous works, however, is on robustness in
the face of only environmental uncertainties (and not opponent strategies), and questions of existence and
computational tractability are either assumed away or the focus is on extensions of correlated equilibrium
concepts. A recent related work in this literature analyzed the computational tractability of robust Nash
equilibria in Markov games, but only provided strong guarantees on the zero-sum regime, showing that
computing such equilibria in general is PPAD-hard [46].
To the best of our knowledge, no previous work in either of these literatures highlights the broad benefits
afforded by risk-aversion in MARL in terms of computational tractability of equilibria. In our work we show
that risk-aversion (and by extension distributional robustness), when combined with bounded rationality yields
a computationally tractable class of individually rationalizable equilibria in all finite-horizon n-player Markov
games. Furthermore we show that these equilibria can be computed using no-regret learning algorithms.
Notations:
We use ∆n to denote probability simplex of size n. In addition, we denote [N] = {1, 2, · · · , N}
for any positive integer N > 0. We denote x =

x(s, a)

(s,a)∈S×A ∈RSA (resp. x =

x(s)

s∈S ∈RS) as any
vector that constitutes certain values for each state-action pair (resp. state).
2
Matrix Games
To begin, we consider n-player general-sum finite-action games. In these games, each player i has access to a
(finite) action set Ai with Ai = |Ai| pure strategies. For each tuple of joint strategies a = (a1, ..., an) ∈A :=
Qn
i=1 Ai each player has an associated reward or utility Ri(a). As is common in the study of these games, we
consider the case where players play over mixed strategies and seek to maximize their expected utility. Player
i’s expected utility in this case can be written as a function Ui : P →R which can be written as:
Ui(π1, ..., πn) = Ea∼π[Ri(a)]
(1)
where π = (π1, ..., πn) ∈P = Qn
i=1 ∆Ai is the joint strategy of all the players. For ease of exposition we
often write the utility as Ui(πi, π−i) where π−i = (π1, ..., πi−1, πi+1, ..., πn) represents the joint strategies of
all players other than i.
We note that the expected utility in finite-action games has a multi-linear form and that Ui(πi, π−i) is
convex (actually linear) in πi for fixed π−i. To see this, one can observe that in two player games, these
utility functions take the simpler, bilinear forms:
U1(π1, π2) = Ea1∼π1
a2∼x2[R1(a1, a2)] = πT
1 R1π2
U2(π1, π2) = Ea1∼π1
a2∼π2[R2(a1, a2)] = πT
2 R2π1,
(2)
where R1 ∈RA1×A2 and R2 ∈RA2×A1 are payoff matrices representing the utility or reward associated to
each joint pure strategy.
A natural outcome in this class of games is the notion of a (mixed) Nash equilibrium.
Definition 1 (Nash Equilibrium). A (mixed) Nash equilibrium of a n-player general-sum finite-action game
is a joint strategy π∗= (π∗
1, ..., π∗
n) ∈P such that no player has any incentive to unilaterally deviate—i.e,.
for all i = 1, ..., n:
Ui(π∗
i , π∗
−i) ≥Ui(πi, π∗
−i)
∀πi ∈∆Ai
While such games are well known to admit at least one Nash equilibrium in mixed strategies, the Nash
equilibrium may be intractable to compute. Furthermore, a preponderance of empirical evidence suggests
that people do not play their Nash strategies and in fact are risk-averse and potentially bounded rational in
their decision-making— inducing new forms of equilibria.
In the next two sections, we introduce generalizations of the expected utility game that allow us to
model agents as both risk-averse and imperfect optimizers—both of these being key attributes of human
5

decision-making. We show that while the addition of risk can undo the existing structure in the game, the
addition of bounded rationality in the form of quantal responses allow us to derive a class of computationally
tractable equilibria in all games that only depends on the degree of risk aversion and bounded rationality
and not on the game structure.
2.1
Risk-Aversion in Matrix Games
Given the setup of an expected utility game, we now allow agents to have risk preferences which we model
through the use of a general class of convex risk metrics which have been the focus of a long line of study in
mathematical finance and operations research [23]. In this framing we move into a regime where agents seek
to minimize a measure of risk.
Definition 2 (Convex Risk Measures). Let X be the set of functions mapping from a space of outcomes Ωto
R. A convex measure of risk is a mapping ρ : X →R satisfying:
1. Monotonicity: If X ≤Y almost surely, then ρ(X) ≥ρ(Y ).
2. Translation Invariance: If m ∈R then ρ(X + m) = ρ(X) −m.
3. Convexity: For all λ ∈(0, 1), ρ(λX + (1 −λ)Y ) ≤λρ(X) + (1 −λ)ρ(Y ).
Typically, and as we assume in the remainder of the paper, the set X is the set of measurable functions
defined on a probability space (Ω, F, P). Under this assumption, the convex measures of risk allow us to
generalize expectations to allow for agents to optimize for more conservative or worst-case outcomes. For
ease of exposition, we write ρπ(X) to denote the distribution that the measure of risk is taken with respect
to a reference distribution π.
In the case of matrix games, we consider the case where agents are risk averse with respect to the mixing
or randomness introduced into the game by their opponents. In generalizing this to stochastic games in future
sections we will also consider the case where agents are risk averse with respect to the underlying dynamics
in the Markov game. Crucially, we assume that players are not risk averse to their own randomness. We note
that is a common approach taken in the literature on risk-sensitive and robust decision-making [63] and it is
necessary since if agents are risk-averse to their own randomness then an equilibrium may cease to exist [22].
We refer to related works for more discussion.
We consider two generalizations of the original game that differ in how risk is incorporated into the
problem: aggregate risk aversion and action-dependent risk aversion. The first generalization allows for
a comparatively simpler analysis but at the cost of a more conservative solution while the second is less
conservative but requires a more complex analysis. Due to monotonicity and linearity of expectation both
of these formulations can be seen as generalizations of risk-sensitive decision-making investigated in the
literature on risk-sensitive control [8] and risk-sensitive RL [63]. To see this reduction, one can simply take
the other agents to be part of an unknown environment.
Aggregate Risk Aversion:
To define a game with aggregate risk aversion, we transform the player’s
utilities in (1) into costs fi which take the form
fi(πi, π−i) = ρi,π−i(Eπi[Ri(a)]) = ρi,π−i
 X
ai∈Ai
πi(ai)Ri(ai, a−i)
!
(3)
where ρi,π−i is used to denote the potentially different risk preference of agent i which depends on the product
distribution of opponents strategies π−i.
Action-dependent Risk Aversion:
To define a game with aggregate risk aversion, we transform the
player’s utilities in (1) into costs fi which take the form
fi(πi, π−i) = Eπi

ρi,π−i(Ri(a))

=
X
ai∈Ai
πi(ai)ρi,π−i (Ri(ai, a−i))
(4)
6

Risk-measure
Penalty function D(p, q)
Entropic Risk [2]
Kullback-Leibler (KL): KL(p, q) = P
i pi log
  pi
qi

[23]
Reverse KL (RKL): P
i qi log

qi
pi

ϕ-Entropic Risk [2]
ϕ-Divergence: P
i pi ϕ

pi
qi

Utility-based shortfall [23]
Utility-based Shortfall (u): infλ>0 1
λ[r + P
i piu⋆ λ qi
pi

]
Table 1: We list several widely-used convex risk-measures with its penalty function D(p, q). Here, p, q are
distributions of the same finite dimension, ϕ and u are differentiable convex functions on R satisfying ϕ(1) = 0
and ϕ(t) = +∞for t < 0. The utility u is equipped with risk tolerance level of r, and its penalty function
depends on its convex conjugate u⋆.
where again ρi,π−i is used to denote the potentially different risk preference of agent i which depends on the
product distribution of opponents strategies π−i.
We remark that in both of these formulations, if ρi(X) = E[−X] for all players i = 1, ..., n (which satisfies
the requirements in Definition 2) then the new formulation reduces to the original expected utility objective.
Thus, both can be seen as generalizations of the classic setup described in the previous section.
While—at first glance— the modified games look significantly more complex than the previous expected
utility maximization setup (cf. (1)), we can rely on a particularly powerful property of convex measures of
risk to simplify and expose some structure in this class of problems. In particular, we make use of the dual
representation theorem for convex risk measures.
Theorem 1 (Dual Representation Theorem for Convex Risk Measures [23]). Suppose that the set X is
the set of functions mapping from a finite set Ωto R.
Then a mapping ρ : X →R is a convex risk
measure (cf. Definition 2) if and only if there exists a penalty function D : ∆Ω→(−∞, ∞] such that:
ρ(X) = supp∈∆ΩEp[−X] −D(p), where ∆Ωis the set of all probability measures on Ω. Furthermore, the
function D(p) can be taken to be convex, lower-semi-continuous, and satisfy D(p) > −ρ(0) for all p ∈∆Ω.
When the set X is again the set of measurable functions defined on a probability space, one can choose
the penalty function D to represent a notion of of distance from the probability law or distribution of the
random variable π. In such cases, the dual representation theorem takes the form:
ρπ(X) = sup
p∈∆Ω
Ep[−X] −D(p, π),
where D(p, π) is convex in p for a fixed π. We also make a simplifying assumption that D is continuous in
both its arguments, which is satisfied by various widely-used risk measures. This general form allows us to
draw connections with a large class of risk and robustness metrics that are based around ϕ-divergences. We
provide examples of common risk measures in Table 1.
Given this setup, we can now write the aggregate risk-adjusted game in the following form:
fi(πi, π−i) =
sup
pi∈P−i
−πT
i Ripi −Di(pi, π−i)
(5)
where P−i = P/∆Ai ⊂RA−i, A−i = P
j̸=i Aj, and Ri ∈RAi×A−i is player i’s payoff matrix. Similarly, the
action-dependent risk-adjusted game takes the form:
fi(πi, π−i) =
X
j∈Ai
πi(j)
 
sup
pi,j∈P−i
−⟨Ri,j, pi,j⟩−Di(pi,j, π−i)
!
,
(6)
where Ri,j corresponds to the jth row of Ri.
We note that we differentiate the penalty functions Di to allow for the different agents to have different
risk preferences. In this form, one can see that in a risk-adjusted game, the players imagine that intermediate
7

adversaries seek to maximize their cost within a small ball in some metric of the opponents realized strategies.
Thus, agents in risk-averse games introduce a certain amount of worst-case thinking into their strategies.
In the aggregate case, from the point of view of player i the game has simplified from a setting with n −1
opponents to a game with 1 opponent who is penalized from taking actions that deviate too far from the
product distribution of the original n −1 opponents’ strategies. In the action-dependent case, the game from
player i’s point of view goes from a n-player game to a Ai-player game who are also similarly constrained.
Since the Nash equilibrium of the risk-adjusted game can be qualitatively different from that of the
original game, we define a risk-averse Nash equilibrium (RNE) as follows. For ease of exposition we do not
differentiate between aggregate and action-dependent RNE since similar results hold for either formulation.
Definition 3 (Risk-adjusted Nash equilibrium). A risk-averse Nash equilibrium of is joint strategy π∗∈P
such that no player has any incentive to unilaterally deviate in the risk adjusted game—i.e., for all i = 1, ..., n
fi(π∗
i , π∗
−i) ≤fi(πi, π∗
−i) ∀πi ∈∆Ai.
Note that since players would like to minimize risk, the direction of the inequality has changed. The
convexity and continuity of the penalty function guarantees that the risk-adjusted games admit at least one
RNE.
Theorem 2. There always exists a RNE for all aggregate and action-dependent risk-averse games presented
in (5) and (6) respectively.
Proof. To begin, we show that fi(πi, π−i) is convex in πi for all πi ∈P−i in (5). This follows from the fact
that Di(·, ·) is assumed to be convex and continuous in its first argument. Invoking Danskin’s theorem
guarantees us that fi is convex in πi for all fixed values of π−i. Since the probability simplex is compact and
convex, the game satisfies the conditions of a convex game [56] and thus a Nash equilibrium must exist. The
action-dependent risk aversion regime follows from the linearity of fi in πi in (6) and a similar invocation of
the existence of Nash in convex games [56].
The fact that these Nash equilibria exist is a consequence of the fact that players are not risk averse to the
randomness that they introduce into the game by playing a mixed strategy. Under the stronger assumption
that they are risk-averse to all randomness, previous work [22] shows that RNE may not exist. Thus, our
specific formulation of risk is crucial in that it will always yield a RNE.
Despite the fact that risk preferences already help convexify player’s objectives, the addition of risk can
serve to weaken existing structures in the player’s cost function. To illustrate this, we show that even in
two-player zero-sum games where R1 = R = −RT
2 , the risk-adjusted game loses any zero-sum structure and
may cease to even be strictly competitive in the sense that one player’s gain is the other’s loss.
Example 1. Consider a 2-player zero-sum game where R1 = R = −RT
2 where players have aggregate risk
aversion in the entropic risk metric with different degrees of risk aversion τ1 and τ2. Under these conditions,
the players loss functions take the following form:
f1(π1, π2) = sup
p1∈A2
−πT
1 Rp1 −1
τ1
KL(p1, π2) = 1
τ1
log

X
1≤j≤A2
π2(j) exp(−τ1[Rπ1]j)

f2(π1, π2) = sup
p2∈A1
πT
2 RT p2 −1
τ2
KL(p2, π1) = 1
τ2
log

X
1≤j≤A1
π1(j) exp(τ2[RT π2]j)

.
Even instantiating R = I2, τ1 = 10, and for any τ2 > 0, both f1(π1, π2) > f1(π′
1, π2) and f2(π1, π2) > f2(π′
1, π2)
holds for the regions π1, π2 ∈∆2 satisfying π2(1) ∈(0.1, 0.5) and 0.75 −π1(1) > π′
1(1) > π1(1), which implies
that the game is not a strictly competitive game.
Note that the previous example introduces degrees of risk aversion into the game through the parameters
τ1 > 0 and τ2 > 0. As τ increases, the game becomes less reliant on the regularization term, which makes the
adversary more powerful and results in more conservative game playing by the player. As τ goes to zero we
recover the risk neutral regime [2].
Finally, note that the additional convexity induced by the introduction of risk aversion guarantee is not
enough to ensure the computational tractability of the Nash equilibrium (see e.g., [46]). This is not surprising
given the fact that computing NE in general convex games can be intractable and that further structural
conditions are required for computational tractability.
8

2.2
Bounded Rationality in Matrix Games
Since risk aversion on its own is not sufficient to guarantee computational tractability of NE, we also introduce
a second important feature of human decision-making into the game: bounded rationality. Interestingly, in
experimental settings risk aversion—by itself— is also not enough to model human decision-making in game
theoretic scenarios [28].
To incorporate bounded rationality into agents, we resort to the notion of a quantal response function.
Definition 4. A quantal response function is a continuous function σ : Rn →∆n such that: If xi < xj,
σi(x) > σj(x), where xk, σk(x) represent the k-th components of x and σ, respectively.
Clearly, when players responses are constrained to be quantal responses, they cannot be perfect maximizers
since the arg max function does not satisfy the first desiderata of a quantal response function. Common
quantal response functions include the logit response function:
σ(x) =
exp(−1
ϵ xi)
Pn
j=1 exp(−1
ϵ xj),
(7)
where the sign is to account for the fact that agents may be minimizing their loss function.
When all players achieve a Nash equilibrium in the space of their quantal responses—the class of strategies
that can be represented by a fixed class of quantal response functions (cf. Definition 4)—the resulting
equilibrium is known as a Quantal Response Equilibrium (QRE). To incorporate quantal responses into our
risk-adjusted game, we introduce regularization to the player’s losses. This can be shown to be equivalent to
constraining the player’s responses to quantal responses (see, e.g., [23, Proposition 7], or [47,68]). We write a
regularized risk-adjusted game as:
f ϵi
i (πi, π−i) = fi(πi, π−i) + ϵiνi(πi)
(8)
where νi is strictly convex over the simplex and controls the class of quantal responses available to player i
and ϵi controls the agent’s degree of bounded rationality.
Example 2. If players are constrained to logit response functions, one can reflect this by incorporating
a negative entropy regularizer ν(π) = P
i pi log(pi). Another class of quantal response functions would be
generated by making use of e.g., a log-barrier regularizer ν(π) = −P
i log(pi). Both of these regularizers give
rise to quantal response functions that satisfy Definition 4.
This game now incorporates two key properties of human decision-making: risk aversion and bounded
rationality on the part of the agents. The natural outcome of this game is what we term as a risk-adjusted
quantal-response equilibrium (RQE).
Definition 5. A risk-adjusted quantal response equilibrium (RQE) of a n-player general-sum finite-action
game is a joint strategy π∗∈P such that for each player i = 1, ..., n:
f ϵi
i (π∗
i , π∗
−i) ≤f ϵi
i (πi, π∗
−i) ∀πi ∈∆Ai
For any set of convex regularizers νi, it is easy to observe the that game remains a convex game and thus
RQE will exist.
As we will show in the following section, if player’s risk preferences and regularizers (and thus their set of
quantal response functions) satisfy a simple relationship, one can show that irrespective of the underlying
payoffs R1, ...Rn, the game admits RQE that can be efficiently computed using arbitrary no-regret learning
algorithms which include e.g., gradient-play and mirror descent.
3
Conditions for Computational Tractability of RQE
In this section we give conditions on the bounded rationality and degree of risk aversion of the players such
that computing cost of RQE in the games is tractable. Further, an immediate consequence of our result is that
players can find such equilibrium outcomes in a decentralized manner using no-regret learning algorithms.
9

Remark 1. For ease of exposition we focus on deriving the results for the aggregate risk-aversion formulation
and defer the results for action-dependent risk-aversion to Appendix B. The results for both formulations in
terms of computational tractability are similar in that both allow for a class of RQE to be learned using
no-regret learning. However, we remark that the analysis of the aggregate case is comparatively simpler
and allows one to compute simple bounds on the set of RQE that are computationally tractable. The
action-dependent case requires more work and slightly more stringent requirements on the relationship
between bounded rationality and risk-aversion.
To derive our results on the computational tractability of RQE under aggregate risk-aversion, we first
introduce a related 2n-player game in which we associate to each original player i an adversary whose strategy
we denote pi ∈P−i. Let p = (p1, ..., pn) ∈¯P = Qn
i=1 P−i. In this new game, each original player’s loss
function takes the form:
Ji(πi, π−i, p) = −πT
i Ripi −Di(pi, π−i) + ϵiνi(πi)
(9)
For each player pi we associate them to a new loss function which we denote:
¯Ji(π, pi, p−i) = πT
i Ripi + Di(pi, π−i) −
X
j̸=i
ξi,jνj(πj).
(10)
In this 2n player game, the i-th player’s adversary, whose strategy is pi seeks to minimize their loss ¯Ji which is
strategically the same as maximizing Ji. We note that unlike the original risk-adjusted game, the introduction
of the new players gives us additional structure that we can exploit. A key feature that we introduce are the
additional parameters ξi,j > 0 which we will use to characterize the degree of risk aversion of each player i.
Given the definition of the 2n-player game we show how no-regret learning algorithms can be used to
compute a RQE. To do so, we show that CCEs of the 2n-player game coincide with NEs of it and NEs of the
2n-player game coincide with RQE of the original n-player matrix game. This is a phenomenon known as
equilibrium collapse which is well known to happen in zero-sum games and certain generalizations of zero-sum
games [10,38]. To prove this, we first define coarse correlated equilibria.
Definition 6. A coarse correlated equilibrium of the 2n-player game is a probability measure σ on P × ¯P
such that for all i = 1, ..., n:
E(π,p)∼σ[Ji(π, p)] ≤E(π−i,p)∼σ[Ji(π′
i, π−i, p)]
∀π′
i ∈∆Ai
E(π,p)∼σ[ ¯Ji(π, p)] ≤E(π,p−i)∼σ[ ¯Ji(π, p′
i, p−i)]
∀p′
i ∈P−i.
With this definition in hand we now present our results on computational tractability of RQE in 2-player
matrix games. We also extend the results to n-player setting in Appendix A.3.
To simplify our results we define H1(p1, π2) = D1(p1, π2)−ξ1ν2(π2) and H2(p2, π1) = D2(p2, π1)−ξ2ν1(π1).
Let ξ∗
1 > 0 and ξ∗
2 > 0 be the smallest values of ξ1 and ξ2 such that H1(p1, π2) and H2(p2, π1) are concave
in π2 and π1 for all p1 and p2 respectively. The parameters ξ∗
1 and ξ∗
2 capture the player’s degrees of risk
aversion as illustrated in Corollaries 6.1 and 6.2 in Appendix A respectively.
The following theorem gives conditions on ξ∗
1, ξ∗
2 and ϵ1, ϵ2, the bounded rationality parameters under
which RQE’s are computationally tractable using no-regret learning. The proof is postponed to Appendix A.2.
Theorem 3. Assume the penalty functions that give rise to the players’ risk preferences D1(·, ·) and D2(·, ·)
are jointly convex in both their arguments. If σ is a CCE of the four player game with ξ1,2 = ξ∗
1 and ξ2,1 = ξ∗
2,
and
ϵ1
ξ∗
1
≥ξ∗
2
ϵ2
,
then ˆπ1 = Eσ[π1] and ˆπ2 = Eσ[π2] constitute a RQE of the risk-adjusted game.
The previous theorem gives a range of risk aversion and bounded rationality parameters under which
an RQE can be computationally tractable using no-regret learning. Before presenting corollaries for certain
instantiations of risk measures and quantal response functions in Appendix A, we briefly remark that the
result does not necessarily guarantee uniqueness, though by exploiting the connections between socially
convex games and monotone games [26] such a result would follow.
10

To validate this result, we show that the class of RQE that is computationally tractable seems sufficiently
rich to capture the aggregate strategy played by people in various matrix games studied in laboratory
experiments in behavioral economics [28,58,59] to showcase differing human behavior from Nash equilibrium
strategies. In particular, we showcase in Fig. 1 that for some choice of parameters (ϵj and τj’s) satisfying
conditions in Theorem 3, we recover risk-averse and rational human behaviors in various matching pennies
games mentioned in Tables 2 and 3. We provide more details about the games and experiments in Appendix D.1
for reproducing our results.
4
Extension to Markov Games
In this section, we extend our results to finite-horizon Markov games, or stochastic games [60] which allow us
to model dynamic games which are played out over Markov decision processes.
A Markov game can be seen as a sequential matrix game with dynamics.
In this paper, we
consider a general-sum finite-horizon risk-aversion Markov game involving n players, represented as
MG = {H, S, {Ai}i∈[n], {Ri,h, Pi,h}i∈[n],h∈[H]}. Here, H is the time horizon length of the Markov games;
S = {1, 2, · · · , S} represents the state space of the joint environment with size S; we reuse several definitions
in matrix game (see Section 2), {Ai}i∈[n] is the action spaces with cardinality |Ai| = Ai, the joint action
space is A, the joint action profile is a ∈A, and P is the product policy space; Ri,h is the utility function
of the i-th player at time step h for any (i, h) ∈[n] × [H], i.e., Ri,h(s, a) represents the immediate reward
(or utility) received by the i-th player given state-action pair (s, a) ∈S × A. For simplicity, we assume Ri,h
is deterministic; Pi,h : S × A 7→∆S denote the transition probability so that Pi,h(s′ | s, a) represents the
probability transitioning from current state s to the next state s′ conditioned on the action a.
Markov policies and value functions.
In this section, we focus on a class of Markov policy, where at
any state s at any time step h ∈[H], the action selection rule depends only on the current state s, and is
independent of previous trajectories. Specifically, for any 1 ≤i ≤n, the i-th agent executes actions according
to a policy πi = {πi,h : S 7→∆Ai}1≤h≤H, with πi,h(a | s) the probability of selecting action a in state s at time
step h. We consider the joint policy of all agents as a product policy defined as π = (π1, . . . , πn) : S ×[H] 7→P
and the corresponding policy space as Π, namely, the joint action profile a of all agents is chosen according
to the distribution specified by πh(· | s) = (π1,h, π2,h . . . , πn,h)(· | s) ∈P conditioned on state s at time step h.
For any given π, we employ π−i : S × [H] 7→P−i to represent the policies of all agents excluding the i-th
agent.
Then for any joint policy π, we can introduce the corresponding value function eVi,h(π) : S 7→R (resp. Q-
function eQi,h(π) : S × A 7→R) of the i-th agent to characterize the long-term cumulative reward by as
follows:
∀(s, a, h) ∈A × S × [H] :
eVi,h(π; s) := Eπ
" H
X
t=h
Ri,t
 st, at

| sh = s
#
,
eQi,h(π; s, a) := Eπ
" H
X
t=h
Ri,t
 st, at

| sh = s, ah = a
#
,
(11)
where the expectation is taken over the Markovian trajectory {(st, at)}h≤t≤H by executing the joint policy π
(i.e., at ∼πt(· | st)) over the Markov dynamics.
4.1
Risk-Averse Markov games
Given these definitions, now we are ready to introduce the risk-averse Markov games (RAMGs) — considering
both the uncertainty of agents’ strategies and the environments (rewards and transitions). Towards this,
we first introduce two important risk-measures for agents’ strategies and environment respectively to form
RAMGs together. Resorting to two sets of convex (convex w.r.t. the first argument with the second argument
fixed) and lower-semi-continuous functions {Dpol,i(·, ·)}i∈[n] and {Denv,i(·, ·)}i∈[n], given any policy π, the two
11

risk-measures are defined as:
∀i ∈[n] :
f π
pol,i(Qi) = sup
pi∈Pi
−πT
i Qipi −Dpol,i(pi, π−i),
∀i ∈[n] :
fenv,i(R, P, V ) =
inf
e
P ∈∆S
h
R + ePV + Denv,i( eP, P)
i
.
(12)
Here, Qi ∈RAi×P
j̸=i Aj is the payoff matrix for the i-th player, R ∈RA, P ∈∆S, V ∈RS. Note that for
simplicity, we choose the same {Dpol,i}i∈[n] and {Denv,i}i∈[n] for all time steps h ∈[H], which can be extended
to diverse ones for each time step.
Armed with those two penalty functions f π
pol,i(·) and fenv,i(·), in a RAMG, the i-th agent aim to minimize
its own risk-averse long-term loss function {Vi,h(π)}h∈[H], where Vi,h(π) : S 7→R for any joint strategy π ∈Π
of the i-th agent is defined recursively as follows: for all (h, s, a) ∈[H] × S × A,
Vi,h(π; s) = f π
pol,i (Qi,h(π; s, :))
(13)
where
Qi,h(π; s, a) = fenv,i (Ri,h(s, a), Ph,s,a, Vi,h+1(π))
and
Ph,s,a := Ph(· | s, a) ∈R1×S.
(14)
In words, Qi,h(π; s, :) ∈RAi×P
j̸=i Aj is the payoff matrix of the i-th player at state s and time step h, where
the value at the ai-th row and the a−i-th column is specified by Qi,h(π; s, a) with a = (ai, a−i). Therefore,
the long-term loss function can be represented as a non-linear sum over the future immediate rewards as
below:
Vi,h(π; s) = f π
pol,i ◦fenv,i
 Ri,h(s, :), Ph,s,:,

f π
pol,i ◦fenv,i
 Ri,h+1, Ph+1,

f π
pol,i ◦fenv,i
 Ri,h+2, Ph+2, · · ·

.
(15)
Solution concepts of RAMGs: risk-averse quantal response equilibrium (RQE).
After introducing
the RAMG problem formulation, we will focus on the solution concept that incorporate both risk-aversion
and bounded rationality of human decision-making — RQE. To specify, we first introduce the regularized
value functions for any given {ϵi ≥0}i∈[n]:
∀(i, h, s) ∈[n] × [H] × S :
V ϵi
i,h(π; s) = sup
pi∈Pi
−πT
i Qi,h(π; s, :)pi −Dpol,i(pi, π−i) + ϵiνi(πi)
= Vi,h(π; s) + ϵiνi(πi).
(16)
In addition, for any policy π, we denote πi,−h := {πi,t}t=1,2,3,··· ,h−1,h+1,··· ,H as the i-th agent’s strategy
over all time steps except step h.
Definition 7 (RQE of Markov games). A product policy π = π1 × · · · × πn ∈Π is said to be a risk-averse
quantal response equilibrium (RQE) of RAMG if we have
∀(i, s, h) ∈[n] × S × [H] :
V ϵi
i,h(π; s) ≤
min
π′
h:S7→∆Ai
V ϵi
i,h
 (π′
h, πi,−h) × π−i; s

,
(17)
where νi(·) is a strictly convex function over the simplex and controls the class of the i-th player’s QRE with
certain degree of bounded rationality ϵi ≥0.
4.2
Algorithm and Theoretical Guarantees
RAMGs with perfect information.
Notice that the risk-aversion Markov games (RAMGs) are sequential
games with multiple rounds, it is natural to learn the game from the last step h = H and then back forward
step by step. Towards this, at each time step h, for all (i, h, s, a) ∈[n] × [H] × S × A, we define the (original)
payoff matrices for all agents at any state s at time step h as
∀(i, s, h) ∈[n] × S × [H] :
bQi,h(s, a) = Ri,h(s, a) + inf
e
P ∈∆S
eP bVi,h+1 + Denv,i( eP, Ph,s,a),
(18)
12

Algorithm 1: Computation method of RQE for risk-averse Markov games (RAMGs).
1: Input: reward function {Ri,h}i∈[n]×h∈[H], transition kernel {Ph}h∈[H].
2: Initialization: bQi,h(s, a) = 0, bVi,h(s) = 0 for all (s, a, h) ∈S × A × [H + 1].
3: for h = H, H −1, · · · , 1 do
4:
for i = 1, 2, · · · , n and s ∈S, a ∈A do
5:
Set bQi,h(s, a) according to (18).
6:
end for
7:
for s ∈S do
8:
Get πh(s) = {πi,h(s)}1≤i≤n ←RQE

f π,ϵi
pol,i( bQi,h(s, :)
	
1≤i≤n

.
9:
Set bVi,h(s) = f πh,ϵi
pol,i
  bQi,h(s, :)

.
10:
end for
11: end for
12: output: bπ = {πh}1≤h≤H.
which shall be used to define a risk-averse matrix game against other players’ strategies later so that we can
calculate a QRE for it with tractable computation cost. Here, we denote the computing routine of a RQE of
a matrix game as RQE(·). Armed with this, we summarize the entire algorithm to compute RQE for RAMGs
in Algorithm 1. The following theorem shows that computing RQE using Algorithm 1 is computationally
tractable when certain conditions of risk-measure and bounded rationality are satisfied, which can be directly
verified based on Theorem 7.
Theorem 4. For any RAMG MG, assume the penalty functions that give rise to the players’ risk preferences
{Dpol,i(·, ·)} are jointly convex in both of their arguments. If for any (s, h) ∈S × [H], we can construct a
2n-player game with the other n-additional players’ payoff as (10) with ξi,j = ξ∗
i,j for all (i, j) ∈[n] × [n].
And for all i = 1, ..., n we have ϵi ≥P
j̸=i ξ∗
j,i, then the output policy bπ from Algorithm 1 is a RQE of MG.
RAMGs can be seen as a sequential of matrix games conditioned on states. As a corollary of the results in
matrix games (Theorem 7), the above theorem shows that the proposed solution concept — RQE in RAMGs
enables computational tractability with any well-defined risk-measures {Denv,i}i∈[n].
RAMGs with imperfect environmental information.
In the previous paragraph, we focus on the
cases when the dynamics of the environment of RAMG — reward and transition kernel are perfectly known.
While in practice, especially in MARL tasks, the environments can be complicated and unknown that need
to be learned by interacting with (sampling from) the environments. In this subsection, we focus on such
scenarios and provide the theoretical guarantees of Algorithm 1.
We focus on a fundamental sampling mechanism — assuming access to a generative model or a simulator
[1,40], which allows us to collect N independent samples for each state-action pair generated based on the
true environment {Ri,h, Ph}i∈[n],h∈[H]:
∀(s, a, j) ∈S × A × [n] :
si,s,a,h
i.i.d
∼Ph(· | s, a),
ri
j,s,a,h = Rj,h(s, a),
i ∈[N].
(19)
The total sample size is, therefore, Nall := NS Q
i∈[n] Ai.
In such imperfect information cases, we propose a model-based approach, which first constructs an
empirical reward function and nominal transition kernel based on the collected samples and then applies
Algorithm 1 to learn a QNE. First, the empirical reward function and transition kernel bP ∈RS Qn
i=1 Ai×S can
be constructed on the basis of the empirical frequency of state transitions,
∀(s, a, j, h) ∈S × A × [n] × [H] :
bRj,h(s, a) = r1
j,s,a,h
and
bPh(s′ | s, a) := 1
N
N
X
i=1
1

si,s,a = s′	
.
(20)
Then with such empirical reward and transition, we can apply the oracle summarized in Algorithm 1.
The following theorem provides the finite-sample guarantees of this model-based approach as below:
13

Theorem 5. For any RAMG MG, we consider penalty functions {Denv,i(·, ·)}i∈[n] are L-Lipschitz w.r.t the
ℓ1 norm of the second argument with any fixed first argument. Applying Algorithm 1 with the estimated
reward { bRj,h} and transition kernels { bPh}h∈[H] as input, the output solution bπ is an δ-RQE of MG. Namely,
we have
max
(i,s,h)∈[n]×S×[H]
n
V ϵi
i,h(bπ; s) −
min
π′
h:S7→∆Ai
V ϵi
i,h((π′
h, bπi,−h) × bπ−i; s)
o
≤δ
(21)
as long as the total number of samples satisfying
Nall = NS
Y
i∈[n]
Ai ≥8S
Y
i∈[n]
AiHL
v
u
u
t S
N log
 2SH
Y
i∈[n]
Ai/δ

.
The proof is postponed to Appendix C. We remark that L can be some constant for various penalty
function, such as L = 1 when {Denv,i}i∈[n] are defined as any ℓp norm including total variation (TV). We also
remark that similar sample complexity guarantees can be shown when {Denv,i}i∈[n] are defined as ϕ-divergence
and allude to analyses ideas in [54, 64, 65, 73]. Note that computing exact RQE can be computationally
expensive or may not be necessary in practice. This result provides the first finite-sample guarantees of
computing RQE in RAMGs. We show that even when the environment is not perfectly known but needs to
be learned by samples, we can achieve approximate-RQEs of RAMGs using sufficient finite samples of size
Nall.
4.3
Experiments and Evaluation
We consider a grid-world problem to test our algorithm (Algorithm 1) for showcasing risk-averse and bounded
rational behaviors. We note that we use our matrix game method (details described in Appendix D.1) for the
RQE solver at Line 8 in Algorithm 1.
Cliff Walk Environment description:
A grid of size 6 × 6 consists of some tiles that lead to the agents
falling into the cliff. The environment setup is as follows: The cliff is the black grid with rewards −2.
Agents/players are rewarded 0 for taking each step and 1 for when they reach the goal. The agents move
in the direction of action with probability pd = 0.9 and takes uniform step in the unintended direction. To
emphasize the risky choices of agents traversing along the cliff or traversing in each others’ paths, we reduce
pd to 0.5 when the agents are both within a grid apart. The episode horizon H is 200.
Algorithm details:
We use the penalty function KL with the log-barrier regularizer, as mentioned in
Table 1 and Example 2, for our experiments. We also use KL divergence for the environmental uncertainty
metric Denv,i with the same bounded rational parameter τ −1
i
used by RQE. We use the full information of
this grid-world to evaluate the Q-values described in Algorithm 1. Additionally, as we use the matrix games
solver for RQE, we have similar statistical deviations for different training runs. In Appendix D.2, we also
showcase results with ℓ1 metric for the environmental uncertainty metric Denv,i.
Results Discussion:
We present two results in Fig. 2. For both results, agent 1 starts at the 5th row and
3rd column of the cliff-walking grid-world, and agent 2 starts at the 2nd row and 3rd column grid position.
In the left figure of Fig. 2, agent 1 is risk-averse to the environmental uncertainty induced by the cliff grids
by traversing the longer route shown by the red arrow. Interestingly, complementing our risk-adjusted notion,
agent 2 is risk-averse w.r.t both the environmental uncertainty and evading the risk of coming into agent 1’s
path (which leads to more chances of falling into the cliff). It makes a less rational and more risk-averse
choice by reaching the end state shown by the blue arrow. In the case of the right figure of Fig. 2. They both
make a more rational choice of reaching goal states but take a riskier path, increasing the chances of falling
into the cliff. Interestingly, agent 1 waits at the corner grid (at the bottom right) until agent 2 passes it, since
being at this grid is a more risk-averse agnostic choice against other players. These empirical evaluations
support our theoretical result (Theorem 4) w.r.t the relative choice of risk-averse and bounded rationality
parameters (ϵj and τj’s) for providing different level of risk-averse solutions.
14

Figure 2:
Cliff Walk Description and Results: The Cliff Walk grid-world is depicted here with color codes
of grids: black is the cliff, blue and pink are agents/players 1 and 2’s goals respectively, grey are grids for
traversing. In both figures, red (blue) arrow depicts the actions taken by the learned policies for agent 1 (agent
2) reaching the states of the arrowhead. The agent 2 policy in the left figure showcases more risk-aversion
(avoid each others’ path to reduce the cliff risk) and less bounded rationality (not goal reaching). The agent 2
policy in the right figure showcases less risk-aversion (more chances of cliff risk by sharing the path) and
more bounded rationality (goal reaching). We also mention values of the risk-averse and bounded rational
parameters ϵ1, ϵ2 and τ1, τ2 used in our experiments satisfying our theoretical conditions.
5
Conclusion
By incorporating risk aversion and bounded rationality into agents’ decision-making processes, we introduced
a computationally tractable class of risk-averse quantal response equilibria (RQE) for matrix games and
finite-horizon Markov games. This approach not only makes equilibrium computation tractable but also aligns
well with observed human behavior in behavioral economics. We provided rigorous theoretical results for
tractable computation of equilibrium concepts and also provided sample complexity results in the generative
modeling setting for multi-agent reinforcement learning. We also validated our findings on small-scale
multi-agent game benchmarks: matching pennies games and cliff walking environment.
Acknowledgment
The work of LS is supported in part by the Resnick Institute and Computing, Data, and Society Postdoctoral
Fellowship at California Institute of Technology. KP acknowledges support from the ‘PIMCO Postdoctoral
Fellow in Data Science’ fellowship at the California Institute of Technology. EM acknowledges support from
NSF Award 2240110.
References
[1] Alekh Agarwal, Sham Kakade, and Lin F Yang. Model-based reinforcement learning with a generative
model is minimax optimal. In Conference on Learning Theory, pages 67–83. PMLR, 2020. 13
15

[2] Amir Ahmadi-Javid. Entropic value-at-risk: A new coherent risk measure. Journal of Optimization
Theory and Applications, 155:1105–1123, 2012. 7, 8
[3] Peter Auer, Thomas Jaksch, and Ronald Ortner. Near-optimal regret bounds for reinforcement learning.
Advances in neural information processing systems, 21, 2008. 28
[4] Robert J. Aumann. Subjectivity and correlation in randomized strategies. Journal of Mathematical
Economics, 1(1):67–96, 1974. 3
[5] Robert J. Aumann. Correlated equilibrium as an expression of bayesian rationality. Econometrica,
55(1):1–18, 1987. 3
[6] Amir Beck. First-order methods in optimization. SIAM, 2017. 29
[7] Jose Blanchet, Miao Lu, Tong Zhang, and Han Zhong. Double pessimism is provably efficient for
distributionally robust offline reinforcement learning: Generic algorithm and robust partial coverage.
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36, 2024. 5
[8] Vivek Borkar. Risk-sensitive control, single controller games and linear programming. Journal of
Dynamics and Games, 11, 01 2023. 4, 6
[9] James N Brown and Robert Rosenthal. Testing the minimax hypothesis: A re-examination of o’neill’s
game experiment. Econometrica, 58(5):1065–81, 1990. 4
[10] Yang Cai, Ozan Candogan, Constantinos Daskalakis, and Christos Papadimitriou. Zero-sum polymatrix
games: A generalization of minmax. Mathematics of Operations Research, 41(2):648–655, 2016. 3, 10
[11] C. Monica Capra, Jacob K. Goeree, Rosario Gomez, and Charles A. Holt. Learning and noisy equilibrium
behavior in an experimental study of imperfect price competition. International Economic Review,
43(3):613–636, 2002. 2
[12] Shicong Cen, Yuting Wei, and Yuejie Chi. Fast policy extragradient methods for competitive games with
entropy regularization. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:27952–27964, 2021. 4
[13] Nicolo Cesa-Bianchi and Gabor Lugosi. Prediction, learning, and games. Cambridge University Press,
2006. 1, 2, 3
[14] Constantinos Daskalakis. On the complexity of approximating a nash equilibrium. ACM Transactions
on Algorithms (TALG), 9(3):1–35, 2013. 1, 3
[15] Constantinos Daskalakis, Noah Golowich, Nika Haghtalab, and Abhishek Shetty. Smooth nash equilibria:
Algorithms and complexity. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.12226, 2023. 4
[16] Constantinos Daskalakis, Noah Golowich, and Kaiqing Zhang. The complexity of markov equilibrium in
stochastic games. In Gergely Neu and Lorenzo Rosasco, editors, Proceedings of Thirty Sixth Conference
on Learning Theory, volume 195 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pages 4180–4234. PMLR,
12–15 Jul 2023. 2, 3
[17] Eddie Dekel and Drew Fudenberg. Rational behavior with payoff uncertainty. Journal of Economic
Theory, 52(2):243–267, 1990. 2
[18] Ido Erev and Alvin Roth. Predicting how people play games: Reinforcement learning in experimental
games with unique, mixed strategy equilibria. American Economic Review, 88(4):848–81, 1998. 2, 4
[19] Hannes Eriksson, Debabrota Basu, Mina Alibeigi, and Christos Dimitrakakis. Risk-sensitive bayesian
games for multi-agent reinforcement learning under policy uncertainty. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.10045,
2022. 4
[20] Benjamin Patrick Evans and Sumitra Ganesh. Learning and calibrating heterogeneous bounded rational
market behaviour with multi-agent reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.00787, 2024. 4
16

[21] Eyal Even-Dar, Yishay Mansour, and Uri Nadav. On the convergence of regret minimization dynamics
in concave games. In Proceedings of the forty-first annual ACM symposium on Theory of computing,
pages 523–532, 2009. 3
[22] Amos Fiat and Christos Papadimitriou. When the players are not expectation maximizers. In Algorithmic
Game Theory: Third International Symposium, SAGT 2010, Athens, Greece, October 18-20, 2010.
Proceedings 3, pages 1–14. Springer, 2010. 4, 6, 8
[23] Hans Föllmer and Alexander Schied. Convex measures of risk and trading constraints. Finance and
Stochastics, 6(4):429–447, 2002. 6, 7, 9
[24] Sumitra Ganesh, Nelson Vadori, Mengda Xu, Hua Zheng, Prashant Reddy, and Manuela Veloso.
Reinforcement learning for market making in a multi-agent dealer market. Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems, 2019. 4
[25] Yue Gao, Kry Yik Chau Lui, and Pablo Hernandez-Leal. Robust risk-sensitive reinforcement learning
agents for trading markets. arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.08083, 2021. 4
[26] Ian M. Gemp and Sridhar Mahadevan. Online monotone games. ArXiv, abs/1710.07328, 2017. 10
[27] Jacob K. Goeree and Charles A. Holt. Stochastic game theory: For playing games, not just for doing
theory. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 96(19):10564–10567, 1999. 2
[28] Jacob K Goeree, Charles A Holt, and Thomas R Palfrey. Risk averse behavior in generalized matching
pennies games. Games and Economic Behavior, 45(1):97–113, 2003. 2, 4, 9, 11, 29, 30
[29] K. Goeree and Theo Offerman. Efficiency in auctions with private and common values: An experimental
study. American Economic Review, 92(3):625–643, June 2002. 2, 4
[30] Christian Gollier. The economics of risk and time. MIT press, 2001. 2
[31] Noah Golowich, Sarath Pattathil, and Constantinos Daskalakis. Tight last-iterate convergence rates for
no-regret learning in multi-player games. Advances in neural information processing systems, 33:20766–
20778, 2020. 3
[32] Sihong He, Songyang Han, Sanbao Su, Shuo Han, Shaofeng Zou, and Fei Miao. Robust multi-agent
reinforcement learning with state uncertainty. Transactions on Machine Learning Research, 2023. 5
[33] Teck Ho, Colin Camerer, and Juin-Kuan Chong. A cognitive hierarchy model games. The Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 119:861–898, 02 2004. 4
[34] Garud N Iyengar. Robust dynamic programming. Mathematics of Operations Research, 30(2):257–280,
2005. 4
[35] Athul Paul Jacob, David J Wu, Gabriele Farina, Adam Lerer, Hengyuan Hu, Anton Bakhtin, Jacob
Andreas, and Noam Brown. Modeling strong and human-like gameplay with kl-regularized search. In
International Conference on Machine Learning, pages 9695–9728. PMLR, 2022. 4
[36] D. Jacobson. Optimal stochastic linear systems with exponential performance criteria and their relation
to deterministic differential games. IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control, 18(2):124–131, 1973. 4
[37] Daniel Kahneman and Amos Tversky. Prospect theory: An analysis of decision under risk. Econometrica,
47(2):263–291, 1979. 2
[38] Fivos Kalogiannis and Ioannis Panageas. Zero-sum polymatrix markov games: Equilibrium collapse and
efficient computation of nash equilibria, 2023. 3, 10
[39] Sampath Kannan, Michael Kearns, Jamie Morgenstern, Mallesh Pai, Aaron Roth, Rakesh Vohra, and
Zhiwei Steven Wu. Fairness incentives for myopic agents. In Proceedings of the 2017 ACM Conference
on Economics and Computation, pages 369–386, 2017. 1
17

[40] Michael Kearns and Satinder Singh. Finite-sample convergence rates for q-learning and indirect algorithms.
Advances in neural information processing systems, 11, 1998. 13
[41] Stefanos Leonardos, Georgios Piliouras, and Kelly Spendlove. Exploration-exploitation in multi-agent
competition: Convergence with bounded rationality. In M. Ranzato, A. Beygelzimer, Y. Dauphin,
P.S. Liang, and J. Wortman Vaughan, editors, Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
volume 34, pages 26318–26331. Curran Associates, Inc., 2021. 4
[42] R. Duncan Luce. Individual Choice Behavior: A Theoretical analysis. Wiley, New York, NY, USA, 1959.
2, 4
[43] Richard D. McKelvey and Thomas R. Palfrey. An experimental study of the centipede game. Econometrica,
60(4):803–836, 1992. 4
[44] Richard D McKelvey and Thomas R Palfrey. Quantal response equilibria for normal form games. Games
and economic behavior, 10(1):6–38, 1995. 2, 4
[45] Richard D McKelvey and Thomas R Palfrey. Quantal response equilibria for extensive form games.
Experimental economics, 1:9–41, 1998. 4
[46] Jeremy McMahan, Giovanni Artiglio, and Qiaomin Xie.
Roping in uncertainty: Robustness and
regularization in markov games. In Forty-first International Conference on Machine Learning, 2024. 5, 8
[47] Panayotis Mertikopoulos and William H. Sandholm. Learning in games via reinforcement and regulariza-
tion. Mathematics of Operations Research, 41(4):1297–1324, 2016. 4, 9
[48] Amir-Hamed Mohsenian-Rad, Vincent WS Wong, Juri Jatskevich, Robert Schober, and Alberto Leon-
Garcia. Autonomous demand-side management based on game-theoretic energy consumption scheduling
for the future smart grid. IEEE transactions on Smart Grid, 1(3):320–331, 2010. 1
[49] H. Moulin and J. P. Vial. Strategically zero-sum games: The class of games whose completely mixed
equilibria cannot be improved upon. International Journal of Game Theory, 7(3):201–221, 1978. 3
[50] Remi Munos, Michal Valko, Daniele Calandriello, Mohammad Gheshlaghi Azar, Mark Rowland, Zhao-
han Daniel Guo, Yunhao Tang, Matthieu Geist, Thomas Mesnard, Andrea Michi, Marco Selvi, Sertan
Girgin, Nikola Momchev, Olivier Bachem, Daniel J. Mankowitz, Doina Precup, and Bilal Piot. Nash
learning from human feedback, 2023. 1
[51] John F Nash. Non-cooperative games. Princeton University, 1950. 1
[52] Barry O’Neill. Nonmetric test of the minimax theory of two-person zerosum games. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 84(7):2106–2109, 1987. 4
[53] Kishan Panaganti and Dileep Kalathil. Robust reinforcement learning using least squares policy iteration
with provable performance guarantees. In International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), pages
511–520, 2021. 4
[54] Kishan Panaganti and Dileep Kalathil. Sample complexity of robust reinforcement learning with a
generative model. In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics (AISTATS), pages
9582–9602, 2022. 14, 28
[55] Wei Qiu, Xinrun Wang, Runsheng Yu, Rundong Wang, Xu He, Bo An, Svetlana Obraztsova, and
Zinovi Rabinovich. Rmix: Learning risk-sensitive policies for cooperative reinforcement learning agents.
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:23049–23062, 2021. 4
[56] J. B. Rosen. Existence and uniqueness of equilibrium points for concave n-person games. Econometrica,
33(3):520–534, 1965. 8, 21
[57] Tim Roughgarden. Intrinsic robustness of the price of anarchy. Journal of the ACM (JACM), 62(5):1–42,
2015. 3
18

[58] Oliver G Selfridge. Adaptive strategies of learning a study of two-person zero-sum competition. In
Proceedings of the sixth international workshop on Machine learning, pages 412–415. Elsevier, 1989. 11
[59] Reinhard Selten and Thorsten Chmura. Stationary concepts for experimental 2x2-games. American
Economic Review, 98(3):938–966, 2008. 2, 11, 29, 30
[60] Lloyd S Shapley. Stochastic games. Proceedings of the national academy of sciences, 39(10):1095–1100,
1953. 11
[61] Siqi Shen, Chennan Ma, Chao Li, Weiquan Liu, Yongquan Fu, Songzhu Mei, Xinwang Liu, and Cheng
Wang. Riskq: risk-sensitive multi-agent reinforcement learning value factorization. Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems, 36:34791–34825, 2023. 4
[62] Yun Shen, Wilhelm Stannat, and Klaus Obermayer. Risk-sensitive markov control processes. SIAM
Journal on Control and Optimization, 51(5):3652–3672, 2013. 4
[63] Yun Shen, Michael J Tobia, Tobias Sommer, and Klaus Obermayer. Risk-sensitive reinforcement learning.
Neural computation, 26(7):1298–1328, 2014. 4, 6
[64] Laixi Shi and Yuejie Chi. Distributionally robust model-based offline reinforcement learning with
near-optimal sample complexity. arXiv preprint arXiv:2208.05767, 2022. 4, 14
[65] Laixi Shi, Gen Li, Yuting Wei, Yuxin Chen, Matthieu Geist, and Yuejie Chi.
The curious price
of distributional robustness in reinforcement learning with a generative model. Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems, 2023. 14, 28
[66] Laixi Shi, Eric Mazumdar, Yuejie Chi, and Adam Wierman.
Sample-efficient robust multi-agent
reinforcement learning in the face of environmental uncertainty. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.18909, 2024.
5
[67] Oliver Slumbers, David Henry Mguni, Stefano B Blumberg, Stephen Marcus Mcaleer, Yaodong Yang,
and Jun Wang. A game-theoretic framework for managing risk in multi-agent systems. In International
Conference on Machine Learning, pages 32059–32087. PMLR, 2023. 4
[68] Samuel Sokota, Ryan D’Orazio, J Zico Kolter, Nicolas Loizou, Marc Lanctot, Ioannis Mitliagkas, Noam
Brown, and Christian Kroer. A unified approach to reinforcement learning, quantal response equilibria,
and two-player zero-sum games. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations,
2023. 4, 9
[69] Amos Tversky and Daniel Kahneman. Advances in prospect theory: Cumulative representation of
uncertainty. Journal of Risk and Uncertainty, 5:297–323, 1992. 2
[70] Yannick Viossat and Andriy Zapechelnyuk. No-regret dynamics and fictitious play. Journal of Economic
Theory, 148(2):825–842, 2013. 2, 3
[71] Zifan Wang, Yi Shen, Michael M Zavlanos, and Karl H Johansson. Learning of nash equilibria in
risk-averse games. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.10399, 2024. 4
[72] Michael P Wellman and Peter R Wurman. Market-aware agents for a multiagent world. Robotics and
Autonomous Systems, 24(3-4):115–125, 1998. 1
[73] Zaiyan Xu∗, Kishan Panaganti∗, and Dileep Kalathil. Improved sample complexity bounds for distribu-
tionally robust reinforcement learning. In Proceedings of The 25th International Conference on Artificial
Intelligence and Statistics. Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, 2023. 4, 14, 28
[74] Ali Yekkehkhany, Timothy Murray, and Rakesh Nagi. Risk-averse equilibrium for games. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2002.08414, 2020. 4
[75] Kaiqing Zhang, Tao Sun, Yunzhe Tao, Sahika Genc, Sunil Mallya, and Tamer Basar. Robust multi-agent
reinforcement learning with model uncertainty. Advances in neural information processing systems,
33:10571–10583, 2020. 5
19

[76] Kaiqing Zhang, Zhuoran Yang, and Tamer Başar. Multi-agent reinforcement learning: A selective
overview of theories and algorithms. Handbook of reinforcement learning and control, pages 321–384,
2021. 1
[77] Runyu Zhang, Yang Hu, and Na Li. Soft robust MDPs and risk-sensitive MDPs: Equivalence, policy
gradient, and sample complexity. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations,
2024. 4
[78] Shangtong Zhang, Bo Liu, and Shimon Whiteson.
Mean-variance policy iteration for risk-averse
reinforcement learning. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 35,
pages 10905–10913, 2021. 4
20

A
Further results on computational tractability of RQE in aggregate
risk-averse matrix games
In this section we provide further results on the aggregate risk aversion formulation of the risk-averse problem.
This section provides a proof of the main result of Theorem 3 presented in the main body of the paper as
well as the generalization of the results on computationaly tractability to n-players. A key step in the proof
is relating the Nash equilibrium of the 2n-player convex game presented where players have utilites of the
form (10) and (9) and RQE of the desired game (3). We then use this result to prove Theorem 3.
A.1
Relating Nash of the 2n-player game and RQE
We first note that this 2n player game is a convex game played over compact convex action sets and thus a
Nash equilibrium must exist [56]. To relate outcomes in this new game to that of the original game, we show
that the strategies played by the original players in Nash equilibria of the 2n-player game coincide with the
RQE.
Proposition 1. If (π∗, p∗) is a Nash equilibrium of the 2n-player game, then π∗is a RQE of Game (8).
Furthermore, if π∗is a RQE of Game (8), then (π∗, p∗) is a Nash equilibrium of the 2n-player game, where:
p∗
i = arg max
pi∈P−i −π∗
i
T Ripi −Di(pi, π∗
−i).
(22)
Proof. To prove this result, we rely on the definitions of Nash and RQE. We begin by proving the first claim
of the proposition. Recall that a Nash equilibrium is a joint strategy (π∗, p∗) ∈P × ¯P such that, for all
i = 1, ..., n:
Ji(π∗
i , π∗
−i, p∗) ≤Ji(π′
i, π∗
−i, p∗) ∀π′
i ∈∆Ai
(23)
¯Ji(π∗, p∗
i , p∗
−i) ≤¯Ji(π∗, p′
i, p∗
−i) ∀p′
i ∈P−i
Noting that each Ji(π∗
i , π∗
−i, p∗
i , p∗
−i) does not depend on p∗
−i, to show the forward direction, we start by
taking the supremum of the right hand side of (23) over pi ∈P−i. Thus, we find that, for all i:
Ji(π∗
i , π∗
−i, p∗) ≤
sup
pi∈P−i
Ji(π′
i, π∗
−i, pi, p∗
−i) ∀π′
i ∈∆Ai
= f ϵi
i (π′
i, π∗
−i) ∀π′
i ∈∆Ai,
where in the second line we used the fact that for any π, p−i, by definition,
sup
pi∈P−i
Ji(π, pi, p−i) = f ϵi
i (π).
It remains to show that for any i = 1, ..., n, Ji(π∗
i , π∗
−i, p∗) = f ϵi
i (π∗
i , π∗
−i). This follows from the fact
that the simplex is compact. Indeed for any fixed π, the function Ji(π, pi, p−i) is concave in pi. Thus, the
supremum is attained at p∗
i since
p∗
i = arg min
pi∈P−i
¯Ji(π∗, pi, p∗
−i) = arg max
pi∈P−i Ji(π∗, pi, p∗
−i).
Since the same argument holds for all i, we have shown that if (π∗, p∗) is a Nash equilibrium of the
2n-player game, then:
f ϵi
i (π∗
i , π∗
−i) ≤f ϵi
i (πi, π∗
−i) ∀πi ∈∆Ai
which is the definition of a RQE.
To prove the second claim, suppose that π∗is a RQE. By definition, we have that if
p∗
i = arg max
pi∈P−i −π∗
i
T Ripi −Di(pi, π∗
−i).
21

then p∗
i by construction satisfies the condition of a Nash equilibrium of the 2n-player game:
¯Ji(π∗, p∗
i , p∗
−i) ≤¯Ji(π∗, p′
i, p∗
−i) ∀p′
i ∈P−i.
It remains to show that π∗also satisfies the necessary conditions on Ji. To see that this must hold, by
definition, we must have that (π∗
i , p∗
i ) satisfies:
Ji(π∗
i , p∗
i , π∗
−i, p∗
−i) = f ϵi
i (π∗
i , π∗
−i) =
min
πi∈∆Ai
max
pi∈P−i J(πi, pi, π∗
−i, p∗
−i)
Further manipulations allow us to show that:
Ji(π∗
i , π∗
−i, p∗) = f ϵ
i (π∗
i , π∗
−i)
=
min
πi∈∆Ai
max
pi∈P−i J(π1, pi, π∗
−i, p∗
−i)
=
min
πi∈∆Ai
J(π1, p∗
i , π∗
−i, p∗
−i)
≤J(π′
1, p∗
i , π∗
−i, p∗
−i) ∀π′
i ∈∆Ai
Since this holds true for all i, this completes the proof.
A.2
Proof of Theorem 3 and immediate corollaries
Given the results showing that finding a Nash equilibrium of the 2n-player convex game allows us to compute
RQE, we present the proof of Theorem 3. We also provide two corollaries that specialize the results to
different risk-metrics and quantal response functions.
Theorem 6 (Restatement of Theorem 3). Assume the penalty functions that give rise to the players’ risk
preferences D1(·, ·) and D2(·, ·) are jointly convex in both their arguments. If σ is a CCE of the four player
game with ξ1 = ξ∗
1 and ξ2 = ξ∗
2, and
ϵ1
ξ∗
1
≥ξ∗
2
ϵ2
,
then ˆπ1 = Eσ[π1] and ˆπ2 = Eσ[π2] constitute a RQE of the risk-adjusted game.
The proof follows by showing that CCE of the 2n-player convex game coincide with Nash equilibria of the
2n-player convex game, and then invoking results from the previous section.
Proof. To prove this, we show that (ˆπ1, ˆp1, ˆπ2, ˆp2) is a Nash equilibrium of the four player game and then
invoke Proposition 1 (where ˆπ1 = Eσ[π1], ˆp2 = Eσ[p2],ˆπ2 = Eσ[π2], and ˆp2 = Eσ[p2]).
To begin, we focus on J1 and ¯J1. By symmetry, the same arguments hold for J2 and ¯J2. We first note
that J1 is (strictly) convex in π1 for all fixed p1, π2, p2 and jointly concave in p1, π2, p2 for all fixed π1. Now,
starting with the definition of CCE for σ and via Jensen’s inequality, we have that:
Eσ[J1(π1, p1, π2, p2)] ≤E(p1,π2,p2)∼σ[J1(π′
1, p1, π2, p2)]
= Ep1∼ˆp1

Eπ2∼σ | p1

Ep2∼σ | p1,π2 [J1(π′
1, p1, π2, p2)]

≤Ep1∼ˆp1

Eπ2∼σ | p1

J1(π′
1, p1, π2, Eσ | p1,π2[p2])

≤Ep1∼ˆp1

J1(π′
1, p1, Eσ | p1[π2], Eσ | p1[p2])

≤J1(π′
1, ˆp1, ˆπ2, ˆp2)
∀π′
1 ∈∆A1.
(24)
Similarly, we note that for ξ1 = ξ∗
1, ¯J1 is jointly concave in π1, π2, p2, such that:
Eσ[ ¯J1(π1, p1, π2, p2)] ≤¯J1(ˆπ1, p′
1, ˆπ2, ˆp2)
∀p′
1 ∈∆A2.
Letting ˆz = (ˆπ1, ˆp1, ˆπ2, ˆp2) and z = (π1, p1, π2, p2) to simplify notation, we can now take a weighted sum
of the four utility functions with λ ∈(0, 1) to find that:
λ
2
 J1(ˆz) + ¯J1(ˆz)

+ 1 −λ
2
 J2(ˆz) + ¯J2(ˆz)

22

≥Eσ
λ
2
 J1(z) + ¯J1(z)

+ 1 −λ
2
 J2(z) + ¯J2(z)

= 1
2 (λϵ1 −(1 −λ)ξ∗
2) Eσ [ν1(π1)] + 1
2 ((1 −λ)ϵ2 −λξ∗
1) Eσ [ν2(π2)] .
Choosing λ = ξ∗
2/(ϵ1 + ξ∗
2), we can further simplify to find that:
λ
2
 J1(ˆz) + ¯J1(ˆz)

+ 1 −λ
2
 J2(ˆz) + ¯J2(ˆz)

≥1
2
 ϵ1ϵ2
ϵ1 + ξ∗
2
−
ξ∗
1ξ∗
2
ϵ1 + ξ∗
2

Eσ [ν2(π2)]
≥1
2
 ϵ1ϵ2
ϵ1 + ξ∗
2
−
ξ∗
1ξ∗
2
ϵ1 + ξ∗
2

ν2(ˆπ2)
= λ
2
 J1(ˆz) + ¯J1(ˆz)

+ 1 −λ
2
 J2(ˆz) + ¯J2(ˆz)

,
where we used the fact that ϵ1
ξ∗
1 ≥ξ∗
2
ϵ2 by assumption and invoke Jensen’s inequality for ν2 at the second
inequality. Thus we have shown that:
λ
2
 J1(ˆz) + ¯J1(ˆz)

+ 1 −λ
2
 J2(ˆz) + ¯J2(ˆz)

(25)
= λ
2
 Eσ [J1(z)] + Eσ
 ¯J1(z)

+ 1 −λ
2
 Eσ [J2(z)] + Eσ
 ¯J2(z)

.
(26)
By Eq. (24), we observe:
Eσ [J1(z)] ≤J1(ˆz), Eσ
 ¯J1(z)

≤¯J1(ˆz), Eσ [J2(z)] ≤J2(ˆz), Eσ
 ¯J2(z)

≤¯J2(ˆz).
(27)
We note a fact: λa + (1 −λ)b = λc + (1 −λ)d and a ≤c, b ≤d implies a = c, b = d for any a, b, c, d ∈R.
Using this fact for Eqs. (26) and (27), we have:
Eσ [J1(z)] = J1(ˆz) ≤J1(π′
1, ˆp1, ˆπ2, ˆp2)
∀π′
1 ∈∆A1
Eσ
 ¯J1(z)

= ¯J1(ˆz) ≤¯J1(ˆπ1, p′
1, ˆπ2, ˆp2)
∀p′
1 ∈∆A2
Eσ [J2(z)] = J2(ˆz) ≤J2(ˆπ1, ˆp1, π′
2, ˆp2)
∀π′
2 ∈∆A2
Eσ
 ¯J2(z)

= ¯J2(ˆz) ≤¯J2(ˆπ1, ˆp1, ˆπ2, p′
2)
∀p′
2 ∈∆A1
Thus we have shown that ˆz = (ˆπ1, ˆp1, ˆπ2, ˆp2) is a Nash equilibrium for the 4-player game. By invoking
Propostion 1 we derive our result that (ˆπ1, ˆπ2) must be a RQE for the original risk-adjusted game.
We now present two corollaries that specialize the results to specific risk metrics and quantal responses.
In the first we look at the case where players make use of the entropic risk and log-barrier reguarlizers.
Corollary 6.1. Suppose the players are risk-averse in the entropic risk metric with parameters τ1 and τ2
respectively, meaning that their risk-adjusted losses are given by:
f1(π1, π2) = sup
p1∈A2
−πT
1 R1p1 −1
τ1
KL(p1, π2)
f2(π1, π2) = sup
p2∈A1
πT
2 R2p2 −1
τ2
KL(p2, π1)
If they respond in the space of quantal responses generated by the log-barrier regularizers with parameters ϵ1
and ϵ2 respectively, and if ϵ1τ1 ≥
1
ϵ2τ2 then, for any R1, R2 the players can compute a RQE by using no-regret
learning.
In the second corollary we look at the case when players make use of the reverse KL penalty function and
logit quantal responses.
23

Corollary 6.2. Suppose the players are risk-averse and make use of the reverse-KL as a penalty function to
give rise to their risk metric with parameters τ1 and τ2 respectively. Their risk-adjusted losses are given by:
f1(π1, π2) = sup
p1∈A2
−πT
1 R1p1 −1
τ1
RKL(p1, π2) f2(π1, π2) = sup
p2∈A1
πT
2 R2p2 −1
τ2
RKL(p2, π1)
If they respond in the space of quantal responses generated by the negative entropy regularizor with parameters
ϵ1 and ϵ2 respectively, and if ϵ1τ1 ≥
1
ϵ2τ2 then, for any R1, R2 the players can compute a RQE by using
no-regret learning.
Proof. The proof of these corollaries result comes from the fact that for ξ∗= 1
τ , the function H(p, π) =
1
τ RKL(p, π) −ξν(π) is concave in π for all p if ξ ≥1
τ . Thus, choosing ξ∗= 1
τ and invoking Theorem 3
completes the proof.
Note that the proof of this corollary is the same as that of Corollary 6.1 and so we only provide one proof
for both.
A.3
Computing RQE in n-player General-Sum Games
We now extend our result to the computation of RQE in n-player games. This requires stronger assumptions
on the players’ risk preferences and bounded rationality parameters. Nevertheless, we once again show that a
large class of RQE is computationally tractable in this class of games.
To do so we now define Hi(pi, π−i) = Di(pi, π−i) −P
j̸=i ξi,jνj(πj). For all i, j ∈{1, ..., n} let ξ∗
i,j > 0
be the smallest values of ξi,j such that Hi(pi, π−i) is concave in πj. Again, the parameters ξ∗
i,j capture the
player’s degrees of risk aversion. The following theorem gives a general condition under which an RQE is
computable using no-regret learning.
Theorem 7. Assume the penalty functions that give rise to the players’ risk preferences Di(·, ·) are jointly
convex in both of their arguments. If σ is a CCE of the 2n-player game with ξi,j = ξ∗
i,j for all i, j ∈{1, ..., n},
and for all i = 1, ..., n we have ϵi ≥P
j̸=i ξ∗
j,i, then ˆπ = Eσ[π] is a RQE of the risk-adjusted n-player game.
Proof. To prove this, we show that (ˆπ, ˆp) is a Nash equilibrium of the 2n-player game and then invoke
Proposition 1 (where ˆπ = Eσ[π], ˆp = Eσ[p]).
We focus on Ji and ¯Ji. We first note that Ji is (strictly) convex in πi for all fixed p, π−i and jointly
concave in p, π−i for all fixed π1 by assumption. Thus, via Jensen’s inequality, we have that:
Eσ[Ji(π, p)] ≤Ji(π′
i, ˆπ−i, ˆp)
∀π′
i ∈∆Ai
Similarly, we note that for ξi,j = ξ∗
i,j, ¯Ji is jointly concave in π, p−i, such that:
Eσ[ ¯Ji(π, p)] ≤¯Ji(ˆπ, p′
i, ˆp−i)
∀p′
i ∈P−i.
We can now take a sum of the 2n utility functions to find that:
n
X
i=1
Ji(ˆπ, ˆp) + ¯Ji(ˆπ, ˆp) ≥
n
X
i=1
Eσ[Ji(π, p)] + Eσ[ ¯Ji(π, p)]
≥
n
X
i=1

ϵi −
X
j̸=i
ξ∗
j,i

Eσ[νi(πi)]
≥
n
X
i=1

ϵi −
X
j̸=i
ξ∗
j,i

νi(ˆπi)
=
n
X
i=1
Ji(ˆπ, ˆp) + ¯Ji(ˆπ, ˆp)
24

where we used the assumed condition on ϵi to guarantee convexity of the functions of πi in the second line,
allowing us to use Jensen’s inequality to derive the third line.
Thus we have shown that:
n
X
i=1
Ji(ˆπ, ˆp) + ¯Ji(ˆπ, ˆp) =
n
X
i=1
Eσ[Ji(π, p)] + Eσ[ ¯Ji(π, p)]
This implies that:
Ji(ˆπ, ˆp) = Eσ[Ji(π, p)] ≤Ji(π′
i, ˆπ−i, ˆp)
∀π′
i ∈∆Ai
¯Ji(ˆπ, ˆp) = Eσ[ ¯Ji(π, p)] ≤¯Ji(ˆπ, p′
i, ˆp−i)
∀p′
i ∈P−i.
Thus we have shown that (ˆπ, ˆp) is a Nash equilibrium for the 2n-player game. By invoking Proposition 1 we
can observe that ˆπ must be a RQE for the risk-adjusted game.
B
Computational tractability of RQE in action-dependent risk-
averse matrix games
As in the case of aggregate risk-aversion, to prove our results we again introduce an auxiliary game that we
relate to our risk-adjusted game of interest. In this case, the loss of the original players is given by:
Ji(πi, π−i, p) =
X
j∈Ai
πi(j) (−⟨Ri,j, pi,j⟩−Di(pi,j, π−i)) + ϵiνi(πi).
(28)
We now associate each player i to its intermediate adversary pi. For each player pi their loss function is given
by:
¯Ji(π, pi) =
X
j∈Ai
πi(j) (⟨Ri,j, pi,j⟩+ Di(pi,j, π−i)) −
X
k
ξi,kνk(πk),
(29)
where pi = {pi,j}j∈Ai where pi,j ∈P−i. This is once again a convex game since each player’s loss is convex
in its own argument. Define ξ∗
i,k ≥0 as the minimum value of ξi,k needed for ¯Ji(π, pi) to be concave in π for
all values of pi for all i. Note that due to the structure of ¯J the values of ξ∗
i,k only depend on properties of
the risk metrics under consideration which are captured in Di, and not on the payoff structure Ri.
The following proposition relates the Nash equilibrium of the 2n-player convex game to the RQE of the
action-dependent risk averse game.
Proposition 2. If (π∗, p∗) is a Nash equilibrium of the 2n-player game, then π∗is a RQE of Game (8).
Furthermore, if π∗is a RQE of the action-dependent risk averse game, then (π∗, p∗) is a Nash equilibrium of
the 2n-player game, where:
p∗
i,j = arg
min
pi,j∈P−i
¯Ji,j(π∗, pi,j)
(30)
The proof of this result follows by exactly the same arguments as the proof of Proposition 1 and is
therefore omitted for brevity.
Given these results we now prove the equivalent of Theorem 7 for the action-dependent formulation. We
note that by a more careful accounting of terms, a stronger guarantee is possible in the 2-player regime
similar to Theorem 3.
Theorem 8. Assume the penalty functions that give rise to the players’ risk preferences Di(·, ·) are jointly
convex in both their arguments. If σ is a CCE of the n-player game and for each i:
ϵi ≥
X
j
ξ∗
i,j
then the marginal strategies ˆπi = Eσ[πi] constitute a RQE of the action-dependent risk-averse game.
25

Note that one point of departure for this result from the previous results is that σ is now the CCE of the
original 2-player convex game defined on the objective functions f ϵ1
1
and f ϵ2
2 .
Proof. To begin, let σ be a CCE of the convex game played on f ϵi
i , where:
f ϵi
i (πi, π−i) =
X
j∈Ai
πi(j)
 
sup
pi,j∈P−i
−⟨Ri,j, pi,j⟩−Di(pi,j, π−i)
!
+ ϵiν(πi).
By definition of a CCE, we must have that:
Eσ[f ϵi
i (πi, π−i)] ≤Eσ[f ϵi
i (π′
i, π−i)] ∀π′
i ∈∆Ai,
for all i = 1, ..., n. Given σ, we can define a new distribution σ′ as (π, p∗(π)) where
p∗
i (π) = arg min
pi∈P−i
¯Ji(π, pi),
with ξi,j = ξ∗
i,j. We now claim that, by construction, σ′ is a CCE of the 2n-player game. To see this, we
observe that
Eσ′[Ji(πi, π−i, p)] = Eσ[f ϵi
i (πi, π−i)] ≤Eσ[f ϵi
i (π′
i, π−i)] = Eσ′[Ji(π′
i, π−i, p)] ∀πi ∈∆Ai,
where the first equality follows by construction of σ′, the second from the definition of a CCE, and the third
from the fact that the value of p∗(π) only depends on π−i and not π′
i.
Similarly, we can show the same result for all the players pi. By simply applying Jensen’s inequality, we
can see that
Eσ′[ ¯Ji(π, pi)] = Eπ∼σ

min
pi,j
¯Ji(π, pi,j)

≤Eσ′[ ¯Ji(π, p′
i)] ∀p′
i ∈P−i.
Thus we can observe that σ′ is a CCE of the 2n-player game. To show that the marginals of π in this CCE
are Nash equilibria of the convex game (and thus RQE), we proceed as before. Using the fact that D(pi,j, π−i)
is jointly convex in each of its arguments, we can apply Jensen’s inequality to find that:
Eσ′[Ji(πi, π−i, p)] ≤Ji(π′
i, ˆπ−i, ˆp)
∀π′
i ∈∆Ai,
where ˆpi,j = Eσ′[pi,j] and ˆπi = Eσ′[πi]. Similarly, by our choice of ξi,j = ξ∗
i,j we can find that:
Eσ′[ ¯Ji(π, pi)] ≤¯Ji(ˆπ, p′
i)
∀p′
i ∈P−i.
Now, we can observe that:
X
i
Ji(ˆπi, ˆπ−i, ˆp) + ¯Ji(ˆπ, ˆpi) ≥Eσ′
"X
i
Ji(πi, π−i, p) + ¯Ji(π, pi)
#
=
X
i
Eσ′



ϵi −
X
j
ξ∗
i,j

νi(πi)


≥
X
i

ϵi −
X
j
ξ∗
i,j

νi(ˆπi)
=
X
i
Ji(ˆπi, ˆπ−i, ˆp) + ¯Ji(ˆπ, ˆpi),
where the third inequality follows by the Jensen’s inequality. By the same rationale as in the proof of
Theorem 7 we can now conclude that ˆπ is a Nash equilibrium-joint strategy profile-of the 2n player game and
thus (due to Proposition 2) an RQE of the action-dependent risk averse game.
26

Similar to the aggregate risk regime, one can instantiate the previous theorem with specific risk-metrics
and quantal response functions to illustrate the class of action-dependent RQE that are guaranteed to be
computationally tractable. Importantly, this class once again only depends on the levels of risk averse and
quantal response but not on the underlying structure of the game. However, note that the requirements are
more stringent since the requirements on the ξ∗’s are stronger since they must ensure joint convexity of ¯Ji.
Nevertheless further algebraic manipulations would allow one to recover analogues of Corollaries 6.1 and 6.2
for the action-dependent risk case as well. For brevity we leave these as exercises to the reader.
C
Proof of Theorem 5
Armed with the estimated reward and transition kernel in (20), we can construct an empirical MG d
MG =
{H, S, {Ai}i∈[n], { bRi,h, bPi,h}i∈[n],h∈[H]}. Analogously, for any joint policy π, we denote the corresponding
risk-averse loss functions or the payoff matrices as {bV ϵi
i,h(π)} and { bQϵi
i,h(π)}, respectively.
To begin with, recall the goal is to show that
max
(i,s,h)∈[n]×S×[H]
n
V ϵi
i,h(bπ; s) −
min
π′
h:S7→∆Ai
V ϵi
i,h((π′
h, bπi,−h) × bπ−i; s)
o
≤δ.
(31)
For convenience, we denote
∀(i, h, s) ∈[n] × [H] × S :
V ⋆,ϵi
i,h (bπ−i; s) =
min
π′
i,h:S7→∆Ai
V ϵi
i,h((π′
i,h, bπi,−h) × bπ−i; s)
(32)
and define the best-response policy π⋆
i := {π⋆
i,h : S 7→∆Ai}h∈[H] so that
∀(i, h, s) ∈[n] × [H] × S :
π⋆
i,h(s) := argminπ′
i:S7→∆AiV ϵi
i,h((π′
i,h, bπi,−h) × bπ−i; s).
(33)
Then, for any i ∈[n], the gap V ϵi
i,1(bπ) −V ⋆,ϵi
i,1 (bπ−i) can be decomposed as follows:
V ϵi
i,h(bπ) −V ⋆,ϵi
i,h (bπ−i)
= V ϵi
i,h(bπ) −bV ϵi
i,h(bπ) +

bV ϵi
i,h(bπ) −bV ϵi
i,h((π⋆
i,h, bπi,−h) × bπ−i)

+

bV ϵi
i,h((π⋆
i,h, bπi,−h) × bπ−i) −V ϵi
i,h((π⋆
i,h, bπi,−h) × bπ−i)

≤V ϵi
i,h(bπ) −bV ϵi
i,h(bπ) +

bV ϵi
i,h((π⋆
i,h, bπi,−h) × bπ−i) −V ϵi
i,h((π⋆
i,h, bπi,−h) × bπ−i)

≤∥V ϵi
i,h(bπ) −bV ϵi
i,h(bπ)∥∞1 +
bV ϵi
i,h((π⋆
i,h, bπi,−h) × bπ−i) −V ϵi
i,h((π⋆
i,h, bπi,−h) × bπ−i)

∞1
(34)
where the first inequality holds by applying Theorem 4 with the estimated RAMG d
MG so that bπ is a RQE
of d
MG, i.e.,
bV ϵi
i,h(bπ) ≤
min
π′
i,h:S7→∆Ai
bV ϵi
i,h((π′
i,h, bπi,−h) × bπ−i) ≤bV ϵi
i,h((π⋆
i,h, bπi,−h) × bπ−i).
(35)
To continue, we divide the proof into several key steps.
Step 1: developing the recursion.
To control the two terms in (34), we consider that for any joint
policy π and time step (s, h) ∈S × [H],
V ϵi
i,h(π; s) −bV ϵi
i,h(π; s)
(i)
= gπ
pol,i (Qi,h(π; s, :)) −gπ
pol,i

bQi,h(π; s, :)

(ii)
= sup
pi∈Pi
−πi(s)T genv,i (Ri,h(s, :), Ph,s,:, Vi,h+1(π)) pi −Dpol,i(pi, π−i(s))
27

−

sup
pi∈Pi
−πi(s)T genv,i

Ri,h(s, :), bPh,s,:, bVi,h+1(π)

pi −Dpol,i(pi, π−i(s))

≤sup
pi∈Pi
−πi(s)T h
genv,i (Ri,h(s, :), Ph,s,:, Vi,h+1(π)) −genv,i

Ri,h(s, :), bPh,s,:, bVi,h+1(π)
i
pi

≤
genv,i (Ri,h(s, :), Ph,s,:, Vi,h+1(π)) −genv,i

Ri,h(s, :), bPh,s,:, bVi,h+1(π)

∞,
(36)
where (i) holds by the definition in (16) and (13), and (ii) follows from the definition of gπ
pol,i(·) in (12).
To continue, we know that for any (s, a) ∈S × A:
genv,i (Ri,h(s, a), Ph,s,a, Vi,h+1(π)) −genv,i

Ri,h(s, :), bPh,s,a, bVi,h+1(π)

=
Ri,h(s, a) −sup
e
P ∈∆S
−ePVi,h+1(π) −Denv,i( eP, Ph,s,a)
−
 
Ri,h(s, a) −sup
e
P ∈∆S
−eP bVi,h+1(π) −Denv,i( eP, bPh,s,a)
! 
=
 −sup
e
P ∈∆S

−ePVi,h+1(π) −Denv,i( eP, Ph,s,a)

+ sup
e
P ∈∆S

−eP bVi,h+1(π) −Denv,i( eP, bPh,s,a)
 
(i)
≤sup
e
P ∈∆S
 −

−ePVi,h+1(π) −Denv,i( eP, Ph,s,a)

+

−eP bVi,h+1(π) −Denv,i( eP, bPh,s,a)
 
(ii)
=
sup
e
P ∈∆S
 eP

Vi,h+1(π) −bVi,h+1(π)
  + sup
e
P ∈∆S
Denv,i( eP, Ph,s,a) −Denv,i( eP, bPh,s,a)

≤
Vi,h+1(π) −bVi,h+1(π)

∞+ L
Ph,s,a −bPh,s,a

1 .
(37)
where the first equality holds by (18), (i) holds by the supreme operator is 1-Lipschitz, and the last inequality
holds by the assumption that Denv,i(·) is L-Lipschitz with respect to the ℓ1 norm for the second argument,
with any fixed first argument. We mention an important note here. As remarked earlier, similar sample
complexity guarantees can be shown when {Denv,i}i∈[n] are defined as ϕ-divergence and allude to analyses
ideas in [54,65,73] to modify this step.
Plugging in (37) back to (36) and applying the results for all s ∈S yields
V ϵi
i,h(π) −bV ϵi
i,h(π)

∞≤
Vi,h+1(π) −bVi,h+1(π)

∞+ L
max
(s,a)∈S×A
Ph,s,a −bPh,s,a

1
|
{z
}
=:lh
=
V ϵi
i,h+1(π) −bV ϵi
i,h+1(π)

∞+ Llh.
(38)
Applying above fact recursively for h, h + 1, · · · , H, we arrive at
V ϵi
i,h(π) −bV ϵi
i,h(π)

∞≤
V ϵi
i,h+2(π) −bV ϵi
i,h+2(π)

∞+ Llh + Llh+1
≤· · · ≤
V ϵi
i,H+1(π) −bV ϵi
i,H+1(π)

∞+ L
H
X
t=h
lt
≤L
H
X
t=h
lt,
(39)
where the last inequality holds since V ϵi
i,H+1(π) = bV ϵi
i,H+1(π) = Vi,h+1(π) = bVi,h+1(π) = 0 for any policy π.
Step 2: controlling the errors {lt}.
The remainder of the proof will focus on controlling (39). Applying [3,
Lemma 17] over all (h, s, a) ∈[H] × S × A, we achieve the union bound that with probability at least 1 −δ,
max
(h,s,a)∈[H]×S×A
Ph,s,a −bPh,s,a

1 ≤
v
u
u
t14S
N log
 
2S Q
i∈[n] AiH
δ
!
.
(40)
28

Applying (40), we arrive at with probability at least 1 −δ,
∀h ∈[H], lh =
max
(s,a)∈S×A
Ph,s,a −bPh,s,a

1 ≤
v
u
u
t14S
N log
 
2S Q
i∈[n] AiH
δ
!
.
(41)
Inserting (41) into (39) gives
V ϵi
i,h(π) −bV ϵi
i,h(π)

∞≤L
H
X
t=h
lt ≤HL
v
u
u
t14S
N log
 
2S Q
i∈[n] AiH
δ
!
.
(42)
Finally, recalling (34) yields
V ϵi
i,1(bπ) −V ⋆,ϵi
i,1 (bπ−i) ≤∥V ϵi
i,h(bπ) −bV ϵi
i,h(bπ)∥∞1 +
bV ϵi
i,h((π⋆
i,h, bπi,−h) × bπ−i) −V ϵi
i,h((π⋆
i,h, bπi,−h) × bπ−i)

∞1
≤8HL
v
u
u
t S
N log
 
2S Q
i∈[n] AiH
δ
!
1,
(43)
where the last inequality holds by applying (42) with π = bπ or π = (π⋆
i,h, bπi,−h) × bπ−i.
□
D
Experiment Details
We provide more results and details of our experiments in this section.
D.1
Matrix Games
Matching pennies matrix games:
Two players in matching pennies simultaneously choose heads or
tails, and a player wins (the other player loses) a payoff if their choices match. The detailed payoff matrices
are provided in Tables 2 and 3. These games from [28,59] are focused on showcasing risk-averse solutions
by developing payoffs strategically such that either player deviating from their choice of plays will cause
hefty damage in terms of payoff to the other player. So, both players prefer a ‘safer’ choice of plays, thus
highlighting both risk-averse and bounded rational preferences.
Algorithm and Result details:
We use the penalty functions KL and reverse KL with the regularizers
log barrier and negative entropy, as mentioned in Table 1, for our experiments. To be precise, we consider the
following two experimental setups: (a) For j = 1, 2, we let νj(p) = −P
i log(pi) and Dj(p, q) = (1/τj)KL(p, q).
(b) For j = 1, 2, we let νj(p) = P
i pi log(pi) and Dj(p, q) = (1/τj)KL(q, p). We note that the parameters
τ −1
j
play the same role as ξj’s (formalized in Corollaries 6.1 and 6.2), i.e., the players take more risk neutral
decisions as τj →0. With the perfect information, we use the vanilla projected gradient descent with constant
stepsizes [6] as the no-regret algorithm to arrive at the CCE σ of the four player game. We use consistent
stepsizes between 10−4 and 10−3 for all our runs iterating through 104 steps of gradient descent. We notice
2% deviations in sup-norm for the algorithm policies in about 20 runs.
D.2
Markov Games
Here, we showcase results corresponding to ℓ1 metric for the environmental uncertainty metric Denv,i for the
grid-world problem. We consider the same Cliff-Walk environment described in Section 4.3 under some minor
modifications discussed here. The rewards for falling into the cliff is now −100 and for reaching the goal is 20.
Agents/players are rewarded a small negative reward of −0.1 for taking each step. The episode horizon H is
100. The algorithm details is the same as described in Section 4.3.
We present two results in Fig. 3 that has similar implications as in Fig. 2. We make one important
observation about these agents equipped with ℓ1 environmental uncertainty metric. These agents are less
risk-averse towards the cliff in horizontal grid axis compared to the results Fig. 2 corresponding to the KL
environmental uncertainty metric. We do not investigate the effects of different environmental uncertainty
metrics in this work and postpone to address in future research directions.
29

Game 1
Game 2
Game 3
L
R
U
10
10
0
18
D
9
9
10
8
L
R
U
9
4
0
13
D
6
7
8
5
L
R
U
8
6
0
14
D
7
7
10
4
Game 4
Game 5
Game 6
L
R
U
7
4
0
11
D
5
6
9
2
L
R
U
7
2
0
9
D
4
5
8
1
L
R
U
7
1
1
7
D
3
5
8
0
Game 7
Game 8
Game 9
L
R
U
10
12
4
22
D
9
9
14
8
L
R
U
9
7
3
16
D
6
7
11
5
L
R
U
8
9
3
17
D
7
7
13
4
Game 10
Game 11
Game 12
L
R
U
7
6
2
13
D
5
6
11
2
L
R
U
7
4
2
11
D
4
5
10
1
L
R
U
7
3
3
9
D
3
5
10
0
Table 2: Payoff Matrices from [59]. In each column, the number above (below) is the payoff for player 1
(player 2).
L
R
U
200
160
160
10
D
370
200
10
370
Table 3: Game 4 Payoff Matrix from [28]. In each column, the number above (below) is the payoff for player
1 (player 2).
30

Figure 3:
Cliff-Walk results for the ℓ1 environmental uncertainty metric.
31
