Distributionally Robust Multi-Agent
Reinforcement Learning for Intelligent
Traffic Control
Shuwei Pei ∗Joran Borger ∗Arda Kosay ∗∗
Muhammed O. Sayin ∗∗Saeed Ahmed ∗
∗Jan C. Willems Center for Systems and Control, ENTEG, Faculty of
Science and Engineering, University of Groningen, 9747 AG
Groningen, the Netherlands (e-mails: s.pei@rug.nl,
j.borger.3@student.rug.nl, s.ahmed@rug.nl)
∗∗Department of Electrical, Electronics Engineering, Bilkent
University, TR-06800 Ankara, Turkey (e-mail:
arda.kosay@bilkent.edu.tr, sayin@ee.bilkent.edu.tr)
Abstract: Learning-based traffic signal control is typically optimized for average performance
under a few nominal demand patterns, which can result in poor behavior under atypical traffic
conditions. To address this, we develop a distributionally robust multi-agent reinforcement
learning framework for signal control on a 3 × 3 urban grid calibrated from a contiguous 3 × 3
subarea of central Athens covered by the pNEUMA trajectory dataset (Barmpounakis and
Geroliminis, 2020). Our approach proceeds in three stages. First, we train a baseline multi-agent
RL controller in which each intersection is governed by a proximal policy optimization agent with
discrete signal phases, using a centralized training, decentralized execution paradigm. Second, to
capture demand uncertainty, we construct eight heterogeneous origin–destination based traffic
scenarios—one directly derived from pNEUMA and seven synthetically generated—to span
a wide range of spatial and temporal demand patterns. Over this scenario set, we train a
contextual-bandit worst-case estimator that assigns mixture weights to estimate adversarial
demand distributions conditioned on context. Finally, without modifying the controller ar-
chitecture, we fine-tune the baseline multi-agent reinforcement learning agents under these
estimated worst-case mixtures to obtain a distributionally robust multi-agent reinforcement
learning controller. Across all eight scenarios, as well as on an unseen validation network based
on the Sioux Falls configuration, the distributionally robust multi-agent reinforcement learning
controller consistently reduces horizon-averaged queues and increases average speeds relative to
the baseline, achieving up to 51% shorter queues and 38% higher speeds on the worst-performing
scenarios.
Keywords: Reinforcement Learning; Distributionally Robust Optimization; Traffic Signal
Control; Intelligent Transportation Systems.
1. INTRODUCTION
Urban intersections are major bottlenecks in road net-
works and contribute disproportionately to delay, fuel con-
sumption, and emissions. Congested signalized junctions
cause substantial economic losses through wasted time and
fuel (Faheem et al., 2024) and worsen urban air quality
and public health (Cohen et al., 2005). Rapid urbanization
further increases pressure on urban transport systems (Di-
jkstra et al., 2021). Designing signal control strategies that
remain effective under strongly time-varying and uncertain
traffic conditions is therefore a central challenge for sus-
tainable urban mobility and it is the main focus of this
paper.
Most existing signal-control systems are based on fixed-
time, actuated, or rule-based adaptive control. Classical
coordination schemes such as SCOOT and SCATS opti-
mize cycle length, green splits, and offsets from historical
volumes and limited detector data (Hunt et al., 1982; Luk,
1984). These methods can provide efficient progression
under their design conditions, but performance degrades
when actual demand deviates from the assumed patterns,
for example, during incidents or atypical flows. Fully actu-
ated and adaptive schemes improve local responsiveness,
yet remain largely myopic and can struggle in dense net-
works where spillback, blocking, and safety constraints
interact in complex ways (Stevanovic, 2010).
Reinforcement learning (RL) offers a data-driven alter-
native that can adapt signal timing directly from inter-
action with traffic (Sutton and Barto, 1998). For single
intersections, deep RL controllers with compact lane- or
image-based encodings, discrete phase-switching actions,
and delay-oriented rewards, have demonstrated improve-
ments over fixed-time baselines in simulation (Huang et al.,
2023). To handle networks, multi-agent reinforcement
learning (MARL) assigns an agent to each intersection
arXiv:2512.18558v1  [eess.SY]  21 Dec 2025

Fig. 1. Schematic of DR-MARL controller for intelligent
intersection management.
and coordinates them via local observations and limited
neighborhood context, achieving promising results on grid
and arterial networks (Zhang et al., 2023). These methods,
however, are typically trained on a small set of nominal
demand patterns and optimized for expected return, with
evaluation focused on average performance.
In practice, operators care strongly about worst-case be-
haviour across diverse traffic demand scenarios (e.g., peak-
hours or disrupted conditions), not only average delay.
Standard RL objectives provide no guarantees on tail
performance, motivating robust and distributionally ro-
bust formulations that bias learning toward hard cases by
upweighting poorly performing scenario groups (Sagawa
et al., 2020). To address this, in this paper, we adopt a
contextual-bandit worst-case estimator (CB-WCE) (Liu
et al., 2025), which adaptively reweights traffic scenarios
during training and thus steers a standard MARL con-
troller trained with proximal policy optimization (PPO)
towards improved worst-case performance, while keep-
ing the policy architecture and environment unchanged.
While robust and distributionally robust RL methods have
been developed and tested mainly on abstract bench-
marks with simplified dynamics and unconstrained action
spaces (Sagawa et al., 2020; Hashimoto et al., 2018), it is
still unclear how well these techniques transfer to network-
level traffic signal control, where demand is highly variable
and signal phases must satisfy strict safety constraints.
Contribution: As shown in Fig. 1, starting from a stan-
dard MARL controller for signalized networks, we em-
ploy a CB-WCE that reweights traffic scenarios during
training, yielding a distributionally robust MARL (DR-
MARL) variant without changing the underlying policy
architecture or environment. Concretely, our contributions
are:
(1) We instantiate a MARL controller for a signalized
3 × 3 grid in a centralized training decentralized
execution (CTDE) framework as our baseline MARL
controller. It uses compact lane-based observations
and discrete phase actions in a high-fidelity SUMO
simulation environment.
(2) We propose a CB-WCE trained by OD-based demand
patterns, enabling the generation of more variable
and adversarial traffic scenarios for robust controller
training.
(3) We retrain the baseline MARL controller with a
worst-case estimator, obtaining a DR-MARL policy,
and compare its average and worst-case network
performance (delay, queues, throughput) against the
original MARL across various traffic scenarios.
Organization: Section 2 formulates the multi-agent
traffic-signal control problem on the calibrated 3 × 3 grid
and introduces the baseline MARL controller. Section 3
presents the scenario-based robustness objective, the CB-
WCE, and the DR-MARL retraining procedure. Section 4
describes the experimental setup, including the network,
traffic demand construction, and training protocol. Sec-
tion 5 discusses numerical results, and Section 6 concludes
the findings and outlines future work.
2. PROBLEM SETTING AND MARL BASELINE
2.1 Traffic signal control as a multi-agent RL problem
We model network-wide traffic signal control on a 3 ×
3 urban grid as a MARL problem. The grid geome-
try (link lengths, intersection spacing) is calibrated from
a contiguous 3 × 3 subarea of central Athens covered
by the pNEUMA trajectory dataset (Barmpounakis and
Geroliminis, 2020), yielding realistic block lengths and
intersection density. Traffic dynamics are simulated in
SUMO (Krajzewicz et al., 2012) and interfaced via
FLOW (Wu et al., 2022) as a Markov decision process
(MDP) for RL training. Details of the simulator stack and
network construction are given in Section 4.
We model each signalized intersection as a single learning
agent, with all agents treated as homogeneous and sharing
a common policy that is updated together. Let I :=
{1, . . . , 9} index the junctions, and let t ∈{0, . . . , H −1}
denote discrete decision steps within an episode of length
H. Denote by zt ∈Z the global traffic state at time
t and by at := (ai
t)i∈I, the joint signal action over all
intersections. The traffic state then evolves according to
the Markovian dynamics: zt+1 ∼Penv
 · | zt, at

, where the
transition kernel Penv is induced by SUMO’s microscopic
vehicle dynamics and the signal programs.
Observation.For each intersection i ∈I, the observation
oi
t = fi(st) summarizes traffic and signal conditions in a lo-
cal neighborhood. On the traffic side, we track eight aggre-
gated lane movements (straight/right (SR), and left-turn
(LT) for North/South/East/West) and, for each move-
ment, record eight features: a movement identifier (SR vs.
LT), distances and speeds of the closest and second-closest
vehicle to the intersection, lane density, mean speed, and
a queue fraction (fraction of vehicles with v < 0.1 m/s,
normalized to a 10-vehicle queue). This yields 8 × 8 = 64
traffic features. In addition, the agent obtains basic signal-
state information for the controlled intersection and its
four orthogonal neighbors: time since last phase change,
current phase index, and a flag indicating whether the
signal is in a yellow/all-red (clearance) interval, giving
5×3 = 15 signal features. Together, these form a compact
observation vector oi
t ∈R79, designed to capture local
pressure and limited neighborhood context.
Action and safety. At each decision step, agent i se-
lects a discrete action ai
t ∈{0, . . . , 7}, choosing one of
eight non-conflicting signal phases at that junction. The
phase set covers straight/right movements for the north–
south and east–west pairs, protected left turns for these
pairs, and four single-approach phases where all move-
ments (SR+LT) on one approach receive green. Safety
is enforced via a fixed 5 s clearance interval (yellow plus

all-red) applied whenever a phase changes, ensuring that
vehicles clearing the intersection are never exposed to
newly conflicting movements. When switching between
phases, we allow “green carryover” for movements that
are green in both the old and new phase, avoiding unnec-
essary clearance for non-conflicting streams and improving
throughput.
Reward. The agents are homogeneous and share the same
local reward specification. At every step t, each agent
i receives a local reward ri
t defined over vehicles on its
incoming edges. The reward combines two components:
(i) a normalized mean-speed term promoting throughput,
and (ii) a penalty on normalized queue length. Concretely,
we use ri
t = κs si −κq ¯qi, where si is the normalized mean
speed on incoming edges, ¯qi is a normalized queue measure,
and the weights κs, κq are shared across all agents. To
train the homogeneous shared policy, we use a single team
reward given by the sum of local rewards, rt = P
i∈I ri
t,
which provides a common learning signal for all agents.
2.2 Traffic demand
For initial training of the baseline policy, we use an
even traffic distribution over the outer edges of the grid.
Each outer edge acts as an origin, with a fixed inflow
of 400 veh/h, resulting in a total demand of 4800 veh/h.
For every vehicle spawned at origin o, the destination d
is sampled uniformly from the remaining 11 outer edges,
so that Pr{d | o} =
1
11,
d ̸= o. Routes between
each origin–destination pair follow shortest paths in edge
count (breaking ties uniformly at random). This yields
a balanced training distribution where all directions and
origin–destination (OD) pairs are represented. This even
OD pattern is the only demand configuration used during
baseline training.
2.3 PPO-based MARL controller (baseline)
In the baseline MARL controller, we adopt a CTDE
scheme with parameter sharing. All intersections use the
same stochastic traffic-signal policy πθ : O →∆(A), where
πθ(a | o) denotes the probability of selecting phase a ∈A
given the local observation o ∈O and shared parameters θ.
At time t, each agent i executes in a decentralized manner
by sampling its phase ai
t ∼πθ(· | oi
t) based solely on
its local observation oi
t. The agents are homogeneous and
share the same local reward. During training, trajectories
and rewards collected from all intersections are aggregated
to perform joint updates of the shared parameters θ. This
parameter-sharing CTDE design exploits the homogene-
ity between intersections, improves sample efficiency, and
reduces the number of trainable parameters.
Let τ = (s0, o1:|I|
0
, a1:|I|
0
, r0, . . . , sH) denote a trajectory
induced by πθ and the environment dynamics, where
o1:|I|
t
:= (o1
t, . . . , o|I|
t ) and similarly for a1:|I|
t
. The baseline
objective maximizes the expected discounted return over
the training distribution of traffic scenarios:
J(θ) = Eτ∼πθ
" H−1
X
t=0
γt rt
#
,
(1)
with discount factor γ ∈(0, 1]. In this baseline, the demand
pattern is fixed to the even distribution of Section 2.2; the
controller is not yet biased toward worst-case conditions.
We optimize (1) using PPO (Schulman et al., 2017), a
clipped policy-gradient method that is widely used in
continuous-control and multi-agent settings. Given a mini-
batch B sampled from the replay buffer Dθ, we define the
policy-gradient objective
J(θ; B) :=
1
|B| |I|
X
(oi
t,ai
t,rt,oi
t+1)∈B
X
i∈I
rt log πθ(ai
t | oi
t).
(2)
The policy parameters are then updated by ascending
the stochastic gradient ∇θJ(θ; B). Coordination emerges
from local observations and the use of a homogeneous,
parameter-shared policy. The resulting baseline MARL
controller serves as a conventional, expectation-maximizing
baseline on the calibrated 3×3 grid. In Section 3, we build
on this baseline by introducing a CB-WCE that reweights
or resamples demand scenarios during training, effectively
biasing learning toward worst-case conditions, while keep-
ing the underlying PPO objective (1) and update rule
unchanged.
3. DISTRIBUTIONALLY ROBUST MARL VIA
WORST-CASE ESTIMATION
3.1 Scenario-based robustness objective
Variability in real world traffic distributions suggests that
a traffic-signal controller should perform reliably across
sets of demand patterns rather than being tuned to
a single nominal case. In our setting, the data-driven
preprocessing in Section 2.2 yields a finite set of K = 8
representative traffic-demand scenarios, K = {0, . . . , 7},
corresponding to synthetic data and a clustered pNEUMA
time window with a distinct spatial flow pattern (e.g.,
different directional imbalances or overall loading).
For a fixed MARL policy πθ and a given scenario k ∈K,
we define
Jk(θ) = E

R(τ)
 scenario k, πθ

,
as the expected return when the network is operated under
that scenario, where τ denotes a rollout trajectory and
R(τ) its cumulative reward (a negative delay-based proxy).
From these per-scenario returns we derive two evaluation
metrics:
Javg(θ) =
1
K
X
k∈K
Jk(θ),
Jworst(θ) = min
k∈K Jk(θ).
(3)
Here Javg captures typical performance across the eight
scenarios, while Jworst captures performance under the
most challenging one.
In our experiments, the baseline MARL controller is
trained only under the synthetic, spatially balanced de-
mand described in Section 2; its Jk(θ), Javg(θ), and
Jworst(θ) on the traffic-demand scenarios are therefore
purely evaluation quantities, not the objective it was opti-
mized for. As a result, the baseline may perform well near
its training distribution but degrade markedly on some of
the data-driven scenarios, leading to a low Jworst.

Our goal in the remainder of this section is to improve
Jworst(θ) and, ideally, to also improve (or at least preserve)
Javg(θ) by retraining the MARL policy under traffic-
demand patterns that are deliberately chosen to be diffi-
cult. To this end, we introduce a CB-WCE that adaptively
reweights the traffic-demand scenarios so that training is
increasingly focused on those that induce high delay. The
estimator itself and its integration with PPO are described
next in Sections 3.2–3.3.
3.2 Contextual-bandit worst-case estimator
To improve the worst-case performance in (3), we intro-
duce a worst-case estimator that operates on a slower
timescale than the traffic-signal MARL controller. Con-
ceptually, this agent plays an adversarial role: for a fixed
signal-control policy πθ, it tries to select traffic-demand
patterns that maximize network-wide congestion, so that
subsequent updates of πθ are biased toward difficult con-
ditions.
Observation. The estimator acts once every 600 s, i.e.,
once per traffic “window”, while the traffic-light agents
act every simulation second. At the end of window τ, we
summarize the recent network state by an 18-dimensional
feature vector sτ ∈R18, constructed from the average
speed and average density at each of the nine intersections
(two scalars per intersection). This compact summary pro-
vides coarse information about where congestion currently
occurs in the grid.
Action. Given the window-level observation xτ, the esti-
mator outputs a non-negative weight vector
wτ ∈R8
≥0,
8
X
k=1
wτ,k = 1.
with one component wτ,k for each of the K = 8 traffic-
demand scenarios. In practice, wτ is the output of the
trained neural network. These weights define a mixed
demand pattern for the next 600 s by combining the base
inflow vectors {λ(k)}8
k=1 extracted from the inflow data:
λmix(wτ) =
8
X
k=1
wτ,k λ(k).
The resulting mixed inflows are then applied in the
SUMO/Flow environment for the duration of the next
window.
Reward. During window τ+1, the MARL traffic-light
policy πθ is applied at every second while demand is
generated according to λmix(wτ). Over this window, we
accumulate the total waiting time of all vehicles in the
network, rCB
τ
= P
v wait timev, where wait timev is the
time vehicle v spends queued in this time window τ. The
CB-WCE seeks to maximize this cumulative waiting time,
in contrast to the signal controller, which aims to minimize
delay.
The worst-case estimator’s policy πψ(w | s) is parameter-
ized by a neural network and trained with a policy-gradient
method. Here, πψ(wτ | sτ) denotes a probability distri-
bution over a weight vector for different traffic-demand
scenarios, conditioned on the current local observation. As
shown in Algorithm 1, training is carried out with θ frozen
at θ0, using tuples (sτ, wτ, rCB
τ
) collected over successive
Algorithm 1 Contextual-bandit worst-case estimator
1: Input:
OD–based
group
distributions
{λ(k)}8
k=1;
traffic-light controller policy πθ; window length Twin;
learning rate lψ; episode horizon HW; replay buffer
Dw.
2: Output: Worst-case estimator policy πψ∗(w | s).
3: Initialize policy parameters ψ and buffer Dw ←∅.
4: for episode = 1, . . . , K do
5:
Reset SUMO/Flow network.
6:
Warm up under a random mixture of {λ(k)}.
7:
Compute initial observation s0
8:
for group window index τ = 0, . . . , until Dw do
9:
Sample weights wτ ∼πψ(· | sτ).
10:
Construct group λmix(wτ) = P8
k=1 wτ,kλ(k).
11:
Apply λmix(wτ) for the next Twin seconds.
12:
Initialize window reward rCB
τ
←0.
13:
for t = 1, . . . , Twin do
14:
for each intersection i ∈I do
15:
Observe oi
t and select ai
t ∼πθ0(· | oi
t).
16:
end for
17:
Apply (ai
t)i∈I under demand λmix(wτ).
18:
Compute waiting time twait of each vehicle at t.
19:
Accumulate rCB
τ
←rCB
τ
+ twait.
20:
end for
21:
Compute next estimator observation sτ+1.
22:
Store (sτ, wτ, rCB
τ
, sτ+1) in Dw.
23:
end for
24:
Sample mini-batch B ∼Dw.
25:
Update ψ ←ψ + lψ∇ψJCB(ψ; B).
26: end for
windows. Given a mini-batch B sampled from the replay
buffer Dw, we define the contextual-bandit objective
JCB(ψ; B) :=
1
|B|
X
(sτ ,wτ ,rCB
τ
,sτ+1)∈B
rCB
τ
log πψ(wτ | sτ),
(4)
and update the estimator parameters via ascending the
stochastic gradient ∇ψJCB(ψ; B)., yielding a policy πψ∗
that focuses on adverse traffic-demand mixtures. In the
subsequent DR-MARL phase (Section 3.3), the worst-
case estimator’s policy πψ∗is kept fixed and used only
to generate demand sequences.
3.3 DR-MARL training with a frozen worst-case estimator
We now describe how the CB-WCE is used to obtain a DR-
MARL controller. As shown in Algorithm 2, after train-
ing the baseline MARL controller πθ0 on the synthetic,
spatially balanced demand (Section 2.2) and training the
contextual-bandit estimator πψ∗(w | x) against this frozen
baseline (Section 3.2), we initialize the DR-MARL con-
troller with θ = θ0 and perform an additional PPO fine-
tuning phase in which only θ is updated. The CB-WCE
πψ∗is kept fixed and serves as a scheduler that selects
mixed demand patterns during this retraining.
During DR-MARL fine-tuning, each training episode is
partitioned into windows of length Twin = 600 s. At the
beginning of window τ, we compute the observation xτ
(average speed and density at each intersection over the
preceding window, or over an initial warm-up period for
τ = 0) and query the frozen estimator to obtain demand

Algorithm 2 DR-MARL with a worst-case estimator
1: Input: Worst estimator πψ∗(w | x); baseline MARL
policy parameters θ0; OD–based group distributions
{λ(k)}8
k=1 window length Twin; episode horizon HDR;
PPO learning rate lθ.
2: Output: Distributionally robust MARL policy πθ∗.
3: Initialize policy parameters θ ←θ0 and replay buffer
Dθ.
4: for episode = 1, . . . , KDR do
5:
Reset SUMO/Flow network.
6:
Warm up using a random mixture of {λ(k)}.
7:
Compute initial estimator observation x0.
8:
for group window index τ = 0, . . . , until HDR do
9:
Sample actions wτ ∼πψ∗(· | xτ).
10:
Construct group λmix(wτ) = P8
k=1 wτ,kλ(k).
11:
Apply λmix(wτ) for the next Twin seconds.
12:
for t = 1, . . . , Twin do
13:
for each intersection i ∈I do
14:
Observe oi
t and sample ai
t ∼πθ(· | oi
t).
15:
end for
16:
Apply (ai
t)i∈I under demand λmix(wτ).
17:
Compute rt and next observations {oi
t+1}i∈I.
18:
Store
 {oi
t}i∈I, {ai
t}i∈I, rt, {oi
t+1}i∈I

in Dθ.
19:
end for
20:
Compute next estimator observation xτ+1.
21:
end for
22:
Sample mini-batch B ∼Dθ.
23:
Update θ ←θ + lθ∇θJ(θ; B).
24: end for
weights wτ ∼πψ∗(· | xτ), which define the mixed demand
pattern λmix(wτ) for the upcoming Twin seconds. Within
this window, the MARL controller applies actions ai
t ∼
πθ(· | oi
t) at every intersection i each simulation second,
while vehicles are generated according to λmix(wτ) and
rewards rt are collected exactly as in the baseline setup.
After all windows of an episode have been simulated,
the resulting trajectory contributes to a PPO update of
θ following the same setting in Section 2.3. The policy
parameters are then updated by ascending the stochastic
gradient ∇θJ(θ; B). Episodes are repeatedly generated in
this two-timescale fashion, so that the traffic-signal policy
gradually adapts to the adversarially chosen mixture of
demand scenarios.
4. EXPERIMENTAL SETUP: 3X3 GRID WITH
TRAFFIC DEMAND
4.1 Network
As described in Section 2, we use a 3 × 3 signalized grid
as the testbed. The geometry is based on a contiguous
subarea of central Athens covered by the pNEUMA tra-
jectory dataset (Barmpounakis and Geroliminis, 2020):
intersection coordinates are taken from the real network
and connected by straight links so that block lengths and
intersection spacing reflect typical urban values. The grid
does not exactly match the true road layout (which in-
cludes one-way streets, heterogeneous lane counts, and side
roads), but preserves the overall scale and orientation. The
construction of traffic demand is detailed in Section 4.2.
Each bidirectional road segment is modeled with four lanes
per direction to provide sufficient storage under congested
conditions. The lane configuration follows a conventional
urban design:
• lane 0 (rightmost): straight or right turn (SR),
• lane 1: straight only,
• lanes 2–3: left turns, with lane 3 also allowing U-turns.
In the RL interface, lanes 0–1 are aggregated into a
single straight/right (SR) movement and lanes 2–3 into
a single left-turn (LT) movement per approach, yielding
two aggregated movements (SR, LT) for each of the four
approaches (N, S, E, W).
4.2 Traffic demand
To train the worst-case estimator and the DR-MARL
controller, we expose the network to a small but diverse
set of OD demand patterns. All patterns are defined on
the 12 outer edges of the 3×3 grid.
pNEUMA-based pattern. We first construct a single
data-driven OD pattern from the pNEUMA trajectory
dataset for central Athens (Barmpounakis and Geroli-
minis, 2020). Vehicle trajectories recorded at 24 fps are
mapped to the nine-intersection study area, and for each
recording window we count the number of trips between
every origin–destination pair. Aggregating the 20 windows
and converting counts to hourly rates yields an OD-rate
vector that reflects typical flows in the subnetwork. This
vector is then normalized to a total demand of 5000 veh/h
and used as the pNEUMA-based scenario.
Synthetic patterns. The aggregated pNEUMA pattern
is relatively balanced and does not cover strongly direc-
tional or highly congested cases by itself. To probe ro-
bustness under a wider range of conditions, we therefore
design seven additional synthetic OD patterns. Each pat-
tern is a 12 × 12 OD matrix with the same total inflow
of 5000 veh/h, but with different spatial structure: one
nearly uniform pattern, inbound and outbound patterns
concentrating flow toward or away from the central area,
north–south and east–west corridor patterns, and two di-
agonal “cross-town” patterns. Small random perturbations
are added to avoid perfectly regular grids while keeping
flows non-negative.
Scenario set. Together, the one pNEUMA-based pattern
and the seven synthetic patterns form eight base demand
scenarios. This set constitutes the scenario index K used
in Section 3: during worst-case estimator training and
DR-MARL fine-tuning, the estimator selects or mixes
these scenarios to generate the traffic demand applied in
simulation.
4.3 Training protocol
For the baseline MARL controller, we use an episode
horizon of H = 900 s, matching the pNEUMA window
length. Each training iteration collects Nroll = 10 rollouts,
yielding a total simulated time of H × Nroll = 9000 s per
iteration. Training is ran for 3000 iterations. The policy is
initialized randomly and learns from scratch, without any
pre-training or imitation.

For the CB-WCE, we use longer episodes that span mul-
tiple 600 s windows so that the estimator can observe the
effect of its scenario-selection decisions. An episode horizon
of HWCE = 9600 s is used, with N WCE
roll
= 8 rollouts per
training iteration and a total of 50 training iterations. In
all cases, the per-window duration remains 600 s, and the
eight traffic-demand scenarios are switched according to
the estimator’s weights as described in Section 4.2.
For the final DR-MARL model, we adopt the same multi-
window structure as for the worst-case estimator so that
the policy is trained under demand that can change every
600 s. An episode horizon of HDR = 9600 s is used, with
N DR
roll = 2 rollouts per training iteration and a total of
400 training iterations. The DR-MARL policy is initialized
from the trained baseline MARL controller and further
updated under the adaptive scenario selection described
in Section 3.3.
4.4 Baselines and Evaluation Metrics
In our experiments we compare two controllers:
• PPO MARL: the expectation-maximizing multi-
agent PPO controller described in Section 2.
• DR-MARL: the same PPO architecture retrained
with the CB-WCE, using the eight traffic-demand
scenarios.
We evaluate performance using standard network-level
traffic metrics:
• Queue length: total number of queued vehicles.
• Average speed: mean vehicle speed over all vehicles.
To evaluate performance over the eight traffic-demand
groups, we compute the horizon-average of each metric for
every group and report the per-group improvement of DR-
MARL over the baseline. The corresponding evaluation
results will be presented in the following section.
5. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
5.1 Results
We compare the baseline MARL controller and the
DR-MARL controller on the seven synthetic traffic-
demand groups introduced in Section 3.1 (groups 0-6),
the pNEUMA traffic demand introduction in Section 3.1
(group 7), and on one additional group derived from the
enriched Sioux Falls scenario (Chakirov and Fourie, 2014)
(group 8). For the latter, we consider a subnetwork in
Sioux Falls that is consistent with our 3 × 3 grid and
normalize the total demand to 5000 veh/h. The DR-MARL
controller is trained on the distribution groups defined
in Section 4.2, whereas the baseline MARL controller is
trained on the distribution defined in Section 2.2; the
Sioux Falls-based group is used exclusively for evaluation
as an independent, previously unseen demand pattern
for both controllers. For each controller and each group
k ∈{0, . . . , 8}, we run 10 independent evaluation rollouts
of length Heval = 3600 s. During a rollout, the demand is
fixed to group k for the full horizon, the learned policy is
kept fixed, and only the stochasticity in vehicle generation
and microscopic dynamics varies across rollouts. For every
group and controller, we then compute the horizon-average
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
3500
Simulation Step
0
50
100
150
Queue Length [veh]
Baseline MARL – Queue Length by Group
Group 0
Group 1
Group 2
Group 3
Group 4
Group 5
Group 6
Group 7
Group 8
Fig. 2. Network-wide queue length over time for each
demand group under the baseline MARL controller.
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
3500
Simulation Step
0
20
40
60
Queue Length [veh]
DR-MARL – Queue Length by Group
Group 0
Group 1
Group 2
Group 3
Group 4
Group 5
Group 6
Group 7
Group 8
Fig. 3. Network-wide queue length over time for each
demand group under the DR-MARL controller.
of the two metrics in Section 4.4: average queue length and
average speed, averaged again over the 10 rollouts.
Figures 2–3 show the evolution of network-wide queue
length over time for all nine groups under the baseline
MARL controller and the DR-MARL controller. Each
coloured line corresponds to the per-timestep mean queue
length (over 10 rollouts) for a single demand group. Un-
der the baseline MARL controller, queues diverge sub-
stantially across groups and reach the highest levels for
group 7, with several other groups also sustaining long
queues. Under DR-MARL, the curves are consistently
shifted downward: all groups stabilize at noticeably lower
queue levels, with group 5 being the heaviest but still
far below the baseline MARL controllers worst case. The
unseen Sioux Falls group (group 8) behaves similarly to
the training groups and also exhibits a clear reduction in
queues under DR-MARL.
Figures 4 and 5 report the corresponding average speeds.
Under the baseline MARL controller, steady-state speeds
vary between roughly 4.5 m/s to 7 m/s depending on the
group, with groups 6 and 7 performing worst. Under DR-
MARL, all nine groups attain higher steady-state speeds,
typically around 8 m/s or above, with only group 5 clearly
below this level. The Sioux Falls group again follows this
pattern, confirming that the DR-MARL policy generalises
better than the baseline to an unseen demand distribution.
Table 1 summarizes these results numerically by reporting,
for each group, the horizon- and rollout-averaged queue
length and average speed under both controllers. The DR-
MARL controller substantially reduces the average queue
length for all groups and at the same time increases the
average speed in every group.

0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
3500
Simulation Step
0
5
10
15
Average Speed [m/s]
Baseline MARL – Average Speed by Group
Group 0
Group 1
Group 2
Group 3
Group 4
Group 5
Group 6
Group 7
Group 8
Fig. 4. Network-wide average speed over time for each
demand group under the baseline MARL controller.
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
3500
Simulation Step
0
5
10
15
Average Speed [m/s]
DR-MARL – Average Speed by Group
Group 0
Group 1
Group 2
Group 3
Group 4
Group 5
Group 6
Group 7
Group 8
Fig. 5. Network-wide average speed over time for each
demand group under the DR-MARL controller.
Table 1. Comparison of MARL and DR-MARL
performance per group (horizon-and-rollout-
averaged).
queue length
average speed
groups
MARL
DR-MARL
MARL
DR-MARL
0
72.287
40.137
6.882
8.411
1
70.318
39.959
6.925
8.404
2
76.829
35.250
6.297
8.571
3
76.062
38.528
5.429
8.358
4
67.008
40.250
6.105
8.347
5
64.620
51.302
5.647
6.524
6
60.094
39.914
4.714
8.330
7
105.153
32.932
4.910
8.685
8
65.711
38.372
6.795
8.353
Table 2 reports the relative change of DR-MARL with
respect to the baseline (percentage decrease in queue
length and percentage increase in average speed). Queue
length decreases by roughly 21–69 % across groups, with
the largest reduction in group 7 (−68.68 %). Average speed
increases by roughly 16–77 %, with the largest gains in
groups 6 and 7 (about +76.7 %). For the unseen Sioux
Falls group (group 8), DR-MARL reduces queues by about
41.6 % and increases speed by about 22.9 %.
As discussed in Section 3.1, our main interest lies in im-
proving the worst-case performance Jworst across demand
groups. From Table 1, we identify group 7 as the worst-
performing group in terms of average queue length and
group 6 as the worst for average speed under the baseline
MARL controller, whereas group 5 is the worst group for
both metrics under the DR-MARL controller. Comparing
these worst cases, the DR-MARL controller reduces the
worst observed average queue length by about 51.2 %
(baseline group 7 vs. DR-MARL group 5) and increases
Table 2. Relative decrease in queue length
and increase in average speed of DR-MARL
compared to MARL (in %).
queue length
average speed
groups
decrease
increase
0
-44.475
22.208
1
-43.173
21.344
2
-54.119
36.104
3
-49.346
53.956
4
-39.933
36.722
5
-20.611
15.536
6
-33.581
76.690
7
-68.682
76.693
8
-41.605
22.931
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
3500
Simulation Step
0
50
100
150
200
250
Queue Length [veh]
Queue Length comparison (Baseline Group 7, DR Group 5)
Baseline Worst Group
DR-MARL Worst Group
Fig. 6. Queue length over time for the worst-performing
baseline group and the worst-performing DR-MARL
group.
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
3500
Simulation Step
0
5
10
Average Speed [m/s]
Average Speed Comparison (baseline Group 6, DR Group 5)
Baseline Worst Group
DR-MARL Worst Group
Fig. 7. Average speed over time for the worst-performing
baseline group and the worst-performing DR-MARL
group.
the worst observed average speed by about 38.4 % (base-
line group 6 vs. DR-MARL group 5). Figures 6 and 7
visualize the evolution of queues and speeds over time for
these worst-case baseline and DR-MARL groups. The DR-
MARL trajectories maintain substantially lower queues
and higher speeds over most of the horizon, indicating
that the contextual-bandit reweighting improves the policy
precisely on its most challenging scenarios.
5.2 Discussion
The results show that distributionally robust retrain-
ing with the contextual-bandit estimator improves both
typical and worst-case performance: DR-MARL reduces
queues and increases speeds across all nine demand groups,
including the unseen Sioux Falls pattern, with large gains
on the baseline’s most challenging groups. These improve-
ments are obtained without modifying the MARL archi-

tecture or reward, but solely by changing which demand
patterns the policy encounters during fine-tuning. At the
same time, Figures 6 and 7 show that the shaded regions
for the two controllers overlap slightly, meaning that while
DR-MARL is better for most rollouts and most of the
horizon, some individual rollouts perform similarly to, or
marginally worse than, the baseline MARL controller. This
residual overlap is expected given the stochastic nature of
the simulations and the finite set of demand groups used
during training.
6. CONCLUSION AND OUTLOOK
We studied distributionally robust multi-agent reinforce-
ment learning for traffic-signal control on a 3×3 grid cali-
brated from the pNEUMA dataset. Building on a baseline
MARL controller, we introduced a CB-WCE that runs on
a slower time scale, observing aggregate speed and density
and selecting mixture weights over eight demand scenarios.
These mixtures are used during fine-tuning, improving
robustness without changing the MARL architecture or
reward in the SUMO/Flow environment.
Numerical experiments on nine distinct traffic-demand
patterns show that the DR-MARL controller improves
both typical and worst-case performance compared to
the baseline. Across nine demand patterns (including an
unseen Sioux Falls-based distribution), DR-MARL reduces
horizon-averaged queues and increases average speeds,
with group-wise improvements of about 21–69, % in queue
length and 16–77, % in speed, corresponding to a higher
Javg and a clear improvement in Jworst. Some rollout-
level overlap between the two controllers remains, but
the overall distribution of outcomes shifts markedly in a
favourable direction.
The present study has several limitations. Robustness is
assessed on a finite set of hand-crafted demand scenar-
ios on a stylized 3 × 3 grid, which restricts the diver-
sity of operating conditions and network structures that
are represented. In addition, the worst-case estimator is
trained only against the baseline MARL controller and
then kept fixed during DR-MARL fine-tuning, so the de-
mand patterns it selects reflect worst cases of the baseline
rather than those of the improved controller. Extending
the framework to larger and more heterogeneous networks,
and allowing the worst-case estimator to adapt to the
evolving DR-MARL policy, is left for future work.
REFERENCES
Barmpounakis, E.N. and Geroliminis, N. (2020). On the
new era of urban traffic monitoring with massive drone
data: The pNEUMA large-scale field experiment. Trans-
portation Research Part C: Emerging Technologies, 111,
50–71.
Chakirov, A. and Fourie, P.J. (2014).
Enriched sioux
falls scenario with dynamic and disaggregate demand.
Arbeitsberichte Verkehrs-und Raumplanung, 978.
Cohen, A.J., Ross Anderson, H., Ostro, B., Pandey, K.D.,
Krzyzanowski, M., K¨unzli, N., Gutschmidt, K., Pope,
A., Romieu, I., Samet, J.M., et al. (2005). The global
burden of disease due to outdoor air pollution. Journal
of Toxicology and Environmental Health, Part A, 68(13-
14), 1301–1307.
Dijkstra, L., Florczyk, A.J., Freire, S., Kemper, T., Mel-
chiorri, M., Pesaresi, M., and Schiavina, M. (2021).
Applying the degree of urbanisation to the globe: A
new harmonised definition reveals a different picture of
global urbanisation. Journal of Urban Economics, 125,
103312.
Faheem, H.B., Shorbagy, A.M.E., and Gabr, M.E. (2024).
Impact of traffic congestion on transportation system:
Challenges and remediations-a review. Mansoura Engi-
neering Journal, 49(2), 18.
Hashimoto, T., Srivastava, M., Namkoong, H., and Liang,
P. (2018). Fairness without demographics in repeated
loss minimization. In Proceedings of the 35th Interna-
tional Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), Stock-
holm, Sweden, 1929–1938.
Huang, S.C., Lin, K.E., Kuo, C.Y., Lin, L.H., Sayin,
M.O., and Lin, C.W. (2023). Reinforcement-learning-
based job-shop scheduling for intelligent intersection
management. In Proceedings of the Design, Automation
& Test in Europe Conference & Exhibition (DATE),
Antwerp, Belgium, 1–6.
Hunt, P., Robertson, D., Bretherton, R., and Royle, M.C.
(1982). The SCOOT on-line traffic signal optimisation
technique. Traffic Engineering & Control, 23(4), 190–
192.
Krajzewicz, D., Erdmann, J., Behrisch, M., and Bieker, L.
(2012). Recent development and applications of SUMO
– simulation of urban MObility. International Journal
on Advances in Systems and Measurements, 5(3&4),
128–138.
Liu, G., Iloglu, S., Caldara, M., Durham, J.W., and Za-
vlanos, M.M. (2025).
Distributionally robust multi-
agent reinforcement learning for dynamic chute map-
ping. In Proceedings of the 42nd International Confer-
ence on Machine Learning (ICML), Vancouver, Canada,
38722–38743.
Luk, J. (1984). Two traffic-responsive area traffic control
methods: SCAT and SCOOT.
Traffic Engineering &
Control, 25(1), 14–22.
Sagawa, S., Koh, P.W., Hashimoto, T., and Liang, P.
(2020).
Distributionally robust neural networks for
group shifts: On the importance of regularization for
worst-case generalization.
In Proceedings of the 8th
International Conference on Learning Representations
(ICLR), Virtual.
Schulman, J., Wolski, F., Dhariwal, P., Radford, A., and
Klimov, O. (2017). Proximal policy optimization algo-
rithms. arXiv. ArXiv:1707.06347.
Stevanovic, A. (2010). Adaptive traffic control systems:
Domestic and foreign state of practice.
Technical re-
port, National Cooperative Highway Research Program
(NCHRP) Synthesis 403.
Sutton, R.S. and Barto, A.G. (1998).
Reinforcement
learning: An introduction. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
Wu, C., Kreidieh, A.R., Parvate, K., Vinitsky, E., and
Bayen, A.M. (2022). Flow: A modular learning frame-
work for mixed autonomy traffic. IEEE Transactions on
Robotics, 38(2), 1270–1286.
Zhang, Y., Yu, Z., Zhang, J., Wang, L., Luan, T.H., Guo,
B., and Yuen, C. (2023). Learning decentralized traffic
signal controllers with multi-agent graph reinforcement
learning.
IEEE Transactions on Mobile Computing,
23(6), 7180–7195.
