Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025
TRACTABLE MULTI-AGENT REINFORCEMENT LEARN-
ING THROUGH BEHAVIORAL ECONOMICS
Eric Mazumdar∗, Kishan Panaganti∗, & Laixi Shi∗
Department of Computing and Mathematical Sciences
California Insitute of Technology
Pasadena, CA, USA
{mazumdar,kpb,laixis}@caltech.edu
ABSTRACT
A significant roadblock to the development of principled multi-agent reinforcement
learning (MARL) algorithms is the fact that desired solution concepts like Nash
equilibria may be intractable to compute. We show how one can overcome this
obstacle by introducing concepts from behavioral economics into MARL. To do so,
we imbue agents with two key features of human decision-making: risk aversion
and bounded rationality. We show that introducing these two properties into
games gives rise to a class of equilibria—risk-averse quantal response equilibria
(RQE)—which are tractable to compute in all n-player matrix and finite-horizon
Markov games. In particular, we show that they emerge as the endpoint of no-
regret learning in suitably adjusted versions of the games. Crucially, the class of
computationally tractable RQE is independent of the underlying game structure
and only depends on agents’ degrees of risk-aversion and bounded rationality. To
validate the expressivity of this class of solution concepts we show that it captures
peoples’ patterns of play in a number of 2-player matrix games previously studied
in experimental economics. Furthermore, we give a first analysis of the sample
complexity of computing these equilibria in finite-horizon Markov games when
one has access to a generative model. We validate our findings on a simple multi-
agent reinforcement learning benchmark. Our results open the doors for to the
development of new decentralized multi-agent reinforcement learning algorithms.
1
INTRODUCTION
Machine learning algorithms are increasingly being deployed in dynamic environments in which
they interact with other agents like people or other algorithms. Often, these agents have their own
goals that may not be aligned with those of the algorithm—making the interactions strategic. These
interactions are naturally modeled as games between rational agents and their ubiquity has driven a
surge of interest in learning in games (Cesa-Bianchi and Lugosi, 2006) and multi-agent reinforcement
learning (Zhang et al., 2021a) in recent years. Indeed, real-world applications of these problems
range from the decentralized control of the smart grid (Mohsenian-Rad et al., 2010), autonomous
driving (Kannan et al., 2017), and financial trading (Wellman and Wurman, 1998) to problems of
aligning large language models (Munos et al., 2024) and agentic AI (Verma et al., 2024).
When viewed through the lens of game theory, many of these problems can be cast as problems
of equilibrium computation under varying information structures, where the equilibrium represents
a stable outcome for rational agents. The most common equilibrium concept is that of a Nash
equilibrium (NE) (Nash, 1950): a solution under which no rational agent has an incentive to unilater-
ally seek to improve their outcome. Despite its popularity as a solution concept, computing a NE
outside of highly structured games is known to be computationally intractable even for two-player
matrix games (Daskalakis, 2013). Coupled with a host of negative results on their computation using
gradient-based algorithms (Mertikopoulos et al., 2018; Mazumdar et al., 2020), converging to Nash
is increasingly viewed as an unreasonable goal for decentralized reinforcement learning algorithms.
∗Alphabetical order.
1

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025
While relaxations of NE like (coarse) correlated equilibria (CCE) are known to be more tractable to
compute—and thus a more attainable goal for learning algorithms— they also have their limitations.
Indeed, while CCE arise out of the use of no-regret learning algorithms (Cesa-Bianchi and Lugosi,
2006), the set of CCE can be large (exacerbating the problem of equilibrium selection that arises
with NE) and may have support on strictly dominated strategies (Viossat and Zapechelnyuk, 2013),
which means that they cannot necessarily be rationalized by individual agents in isolation (Dekel and
Fudenberg, 1990). Furthermore, a dynamic versions of CCE—stationary Markov CCE—can also be
intractable to compute in general-sum Markov games (Daskalakis et al., 2023b).
Beyond these hardness results, solution concepts like NE and CCE also fail to be predictive of
what strategies people play in games (McKelvey and Palfrey, 1995; Erev and Roth, 1998), with
people being observed to be imperfect optimizers (Goeree and Holt, 1999; Capra et al., 2002) and
risk-averse (Goeree et al., 2003) when confronted with game theoretic scenarios. This aligns with
celebrated work in behavioral economics and mathematical psychology which has repeatedly shown
that dominant features of human decision-making are a failure to perfectly optimize (Luce, 1959) and
risk-aversion (Kahneman and Tversky, 1979; Tversky and Kahneman, 1992).
The first observation is often referred to as bounded rationality which posits that individuals are
naturally prone to making mistakes and often fail to be perfectly optimal (Luce, 1959). This is often
captured in games through the idea of a quantal response equilibrium (QRE) (McKelvey and Palfrey,
1995). The second observation can be attributed to the fact that players typically face uncertainty
and risk in their decisions. These arise from environmental uncertainties like unknown future events,
noise, or even the mere presence of other players. This can lead people to prefer risk-averse strategies,
i.e., strategies which give more certain outcomes at the cost of lower expected returns (Gollier,
2001). Interestingly, there is experimental evidence that neither of these properties alone can account
for people’s patterns of play observed in controlled experiments (Goeree et al., 2003; Goeree and
Offerman, 2002), and that models of decision-making that incorporate both of these features have the
best predictive power (Goeree et al., 2003).
Contributions: Motivated by these findings, in this paper we study games in which players are risk-
averse and have bounded rationality and study the computational properties of the natural equilibrium
concept: a risk-averse quantal response equilibrium (RQE). At first glance, the introduction of these
features of human decision-making into games introduces non-linearities that break existing game-
theoretic structures. Indeed we show how neither of these features alone give rise to a single class of
equilibria that can efficiently computed across all games. However, by relying on dual formulations
of risk we show how—for a large range of degrees of risk-aversion and bounded rationality—a
class of RQE are computationally tractable in all n-player matrix and finite horizon Markov games.
Importantly, these conditions are independent of the underlying game and only depend on the class
of risk metrics and quantal responses under consideration. Thus, RQE not only capture important
features of human decision-making but are also more amenable to computation than QRE or NE in
matrix and finite-horizon Markov games. This opens the door for the development of theoretically
principled decentralized algorithms for multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) centered around
RQE as opposed to CCE or NE. We refer readers to the discussion of related works in Appendix A
for a more in-depth discussion of different equilibria concepts in the context for our work.
To emphasize the practical relevance of this theoretical result we show how the regime for which
RQE are computationally tractable captures real-world data from behavioral economics on people’s
observed pattern of play in 13 different games. This is illustrated in Fig. 1, where the blue region
represents the set of RQE that are computationally tractable which is a function of agents’ degree of
risk-aversion (τ1/τ2), and level of bounded rationality (ϵ1/ϵ2).
Altogether, our results show that imbuing artificial agents with features of human decision-making
from behavioral economics gives rise to an expressive class of equilibria in games. Crucially, this
new solution concept appears to overcome many of the computational limitations of existing concepts
and thus appears to be a promising foundation for the development of principled MARL algorithms.
Notations: We use ∆n to denote probability simplex of size n. In addition, we denote [N] =
{1, 2, · · · , N} for any positive integer N > 0. We denote x =

x(s, a)

(s,a)∈S×A ∈RSA (resp. x =

x(s)

s∈S ∈RS) as any vector that constitutes certain values for each state-action pair (resp. state).
2

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025
Figure 1:
The shaded blue region depicts the regime of risk-aversion and bounded rationality
preferences that allow for computationally tractable RQE in all 2-player games as shown in Theorem 3.
The markers GHP: Game 4 (Goeree et al., 2003) and SC: Game 1-12 (Selten and Chmura, 2008)
represent the necessary parameter values required to recreate the average strategy played by people in
various 2-player games in observational data up to 1% accuracy.
2
RISK-AVERSION AND BOUNDED RATIONALITY IN GAMES
To begin, we focus on n-player general-sum finite-action games. In these games, each player i has
access to a (finite) action set Ai with Ai = |Ai| pure strategies. For each tuple of joint strategies
a = (a1, ..., an) ∈A := Qn
i=1 Ai each player has an associated reward or utility Ri(a). As is
common in the study of these games, we consider the case where players play over mixed strategies
and seek to maximize their expected utility. Player i’s expected utility in this case can be written as a
function Ui : P →R which can be written as:
Ui(π1, ..., πn) = Ea∼π[Ri(a)]
(1)
where π = (π1, ..., πn) ∈P := Qn
i=1 ∆Ai is the joint strategy of all the players. For ease
of exposition we often write the utility as Ui(πi, π−i) where π−i = (π1, ..., πi−1, πi+1, ..., πn)
represents the joint strategies of all players other than i. A natural outcome in this class of games is
the notion of a (mixed) Nash equilibrium.
Definition 1 (Nash Equilibrium). A (mixed) Nash equilibrium of a n-player general-sum finite-action
game is a joint strategy π∗= (π∗
1, ..., π∗
n) ∈P such that no player has any incentive to unilaterally
deviate—i.e., for all i = 1, ..., n: Ui(π∗
i , π∗
−i) ≥Ui(πi, π∗
−i)
∀πi ∈∆Ai.
As introduced, n-player general-sum finite-action games are well known to admit at least one
Nash equilibrium (NE) in mixed strategies (Nash, 1951). While NE are known to always the
exist in mixed strategies in the games we consider, they have also been shown to be intractable to
compute (Daskalakis, 2013). Moreover, NE may not realistically predict human decision-making
behavior. Indeed a preponderance of empirical evidence suggests that people do not play their Nash
strategies and in fact are potentially bounded rational and risk-averse in their decision-making—
inducing new forms of equilibria (see e.g., Luce (1959); Tversky and Kahneman (1992); Goeree
et al. (2003); McKelvey and Palfrey (1995)). To formally introduce these features of human decision-
making into the problem, we construct generalizations of the expected utility game that allow us to
model agents as either imperfect optimizers and risk-averse.
2.1
BOUNDED RATIONALITY IN GAMES
In contrast to risk-aversion, which has been under-explored in game theory and multi-agent rein-
forcement learning, bounded rationality is more common. Many works studying the computational
benefits of incorporating it into games (Sokota et al., 2023; Mertikopoulos and Sandholm, 2016;
Cen et al., 2021; Leonardos et al., 2021; Evans and Ganesh, 2024; Jacob et al., 2022), with the most
common form of bounded rationality found in the literature on learning in games being that of a
quantal response. These capture bounded rationality by either assuming that the players are rational in
a stochastically perturbed version of the game or equivalently that players’ strategies are constrained
to the set of quantal response functions (McKelvey and Palfrey, 1995; 1998).
3

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025
Definition 2. (Quantal Response Function) A quantal response function is a continuous function
σ : Rn →∆n such that for any x ∈Rn: If xi < xj, σi(x) > σj(x), where xk, σk(x) represent the
k-th components of x and σ, respectively.
These functions restrict players’ strategies to subsets of the simplex—effectively smoothing their
best responses and preventing them from being complete utility maximizers. One way to restrict
a player’s strategy to quantal responses is by regularizing their objective with a suitable strongly
convex regularizer νi (see, e.g., Föllmer and Schied (2002, Proposition 7), or Sokota et al. (2023);
Mertikopoulos and Sandholm (2016)). This yields adjusted utility functions of the form:
U ϵi
i (π1, ..., πn) = Ea∼π[Ri(a)] −ϵiν(πi),
(2)
where ϵi ≥0 captures player i’s degree of bounded rationality. As ϵi increases their strategy space
becomes more constrained, yielding more boundedly rational strategies. When all players achieve
a Nash equilibrium in the space of their quantal responses—the class of strategies that can be
represented by a fixed class of quantal response functions (cf. Definition 2)—the resulting equilibrium
is known as a quantal response equilibrium (QRE).
Despite the many works that focus on computing QRE, to the best of our knowledge there are no
classes of QRE that are universally computable across all games. Indeed most works focus on
zero-sum or approximately zero-sum games (Sokota et al., 2023; Mertikopoulos and Sandholm,
2016; Leonardos et al., 2021). In more general classes of games the class of QRE or equivalently the
level of bounded rationality needed for computational tractability depends on the underlying game
structure (e.g., the size of player’s action spaces and the magnitude of their rewards) which may not
be known a priori (Sun et al., 2024). Furthermore, we note that more work in behavioral economics
has consistently highlighted that bounded rationality on its own is not enough to capture the nuances
of human decision-making, even for simple games such as matching pennies (Goeree et al., 2003;
Tversky and Kahneman, 1992). These findings motivate us to introduce risk-aversion into games.
2.2
RISK-AVERSION IN GAMES
To allow agents to have risk preferences we make use of a general class of convex risk metrics from
mathematical finance and operations research (Föllmer and Schied, 2002). In this framing we move
into a regime where agents seek to minimize a measure of risk.
Definition 3 (Convex Risk Measures). Let X be the set of functions mapping from a space of
outcomes Ωto R. A convex measure of risk is a mapping ρ : X →R satisfying:
1. Monotonicity: If X ≤Y almost surely, then ρ(X) ≥ρ(Y ).
2. Translation Invariance: If m ∈R then ρ(X + m) = ρ(X) −m.
3. Convexity: For all λ ∈(0, 1), ρ(λX + (1 −λ)Y ) ≤λρ(X) + (1 −λ)ρ(Y ).
Typically, and as we assume in the remainder of the paper, the set X is the set of measurable functions
defined on a probability space (Ω, F, P). Under this assumption, the convex measures of risk allow
us to generalize expectations to trade off high variance for and higher utilities. For ease of exposition,
we write ρπ(X) to highlight the distribution that the convex risk measure is taken with respect to π.
Given these definitions, we present two ways of incorporating risk-aversion into games.
Remark 1. A crucial feature of our formulation of risk-aversion is that players are not risk-averse
to the randomness introduced by their own strategy and only to the uncertainty caused by the
environment and their opponents. This is a common approach taken (often implicitly) in the literature
on single-agent risk-sensitive and robust decision-making (Shen et al., 2014). It also appears to be
necessary to ensure the existence of equilibria introduced in Theorem 2 shortly; otherwise as studied
in Fiat and Papadimitriou (2010), equilibria may not exist.
To see why our framing of risk-aversion is natural we introduce the first form of risk that we consider:
action-dependent risk-aversion.
Action-dependent Risk Aversion: In this framing, a player first evaluates the risk associated with
each of their pure strategies ai: ρi,a−i∼π−i(R(ai, a−i). The player then minimizes their expected
risk. We capture this by transforming the player’s utilities in (1) into costs f act
i
of the form:
f act
i
(πi, π−i) = Eπi

ρi,π−i(Ri(a))

= P
ai∈Ai πi(ai)ρi,π−i (Ri(ai, a−i)) ,
(3)
4

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025
where ρi,π−i is used to capture agent i’s risk preference which depends on the product distribution of
opponents strategies π−i.
Under action-dependent risk-aversion a player uses mixed strategies only when two pure strategies
yield the same level of risk. Thus introducing additional risk-aversion to πi does not change outcomes.
Aggregate Risk Aversion: The second form of risk-aversion we consider, aggregate risk-aversion is
more conservative, but allows for a simpler analysis. To capture aggregate risk aversion, we transform
the player’s utilities in (1) into costs f agg
i
which take the form
f agg
i
(πi, π−i) = ρi,π−i(Eπi[Ri(a)]) = ρi,π−i
 P
ai∈Ai πi(ai)Ri(ai, a−i)

.
(4)
Aggregate risk-aversion captures the fact that risks may be correlated across pure strategies, and is
related (due to convexity of ρi) by Jensen’s inequality to action-dependent risk-aversion such that
f agg
i
(π) < f act
i
(π). Interestingly, recent work in behavioral economics has shown that this may be a
better model of risk-aversion in people (Oprea and Robalino, 2024).
We note that if ρi(X) = E[−X] for all players i = 1, ..., n (which satisfies the requirements in
Definition 3), then the new formulations reduce to the original expected utility objective. Thus, the
class of risk-averse games can be seen as generalizations of the classic expected utility games (1).
Remark 2. For brevity, as both generalizations have similar implications, we provide details and
results of action-dependent risk aversion in our supplementary material and focus on aggregate risk
aversion for the remainder of the paper. Thus we denote fi = f agg
i
for the remainder of the paper
and analyze fi = f act
i
in the supplementary material.
While at first glance the modified game looks significantly more complex than the previous expected
utility maximization setup (cf. (1)), we can rely on a particularly powerful property of convex
measures of risk to simplify and expose some structure in this class of problems.
Theorem 1 (Dual Representation Theorem for Convex Risk Measures (Föllmer and Schied, 2002)).
Suppose that the set X is the set of functions mapping from a finite set Ωto R. Then a mapping
ρ : X →R is a convex risk measure (cf. Definition 3) if and only if there exists a penalty function
D : ∆Ω→(−∞, ∞] such that: ρ(X) = supp∈∆ΩEp[−X] −D(p), where ∆Ωis the set of all
probability measures on Ω. Furthermore, the function D(p) can be taken to be convex, lower-semi-
continuous, and satisfy D(p) > −ρ(0) for all p ∈∆Ω.
Throughout, we make a simplifying assumption that D is continuous in both arguments, which is
satisfied by various widely used risk measures Table 1. We provide more details on penalty functions
in Appendix B. Given this result, we derive the aggregate risk-averse game (4) in the following form:
fi(πi, π−i) =
sup
pi∈P−i
−πT
i Ripi −1
τi
Di(pi, π−i) ∀i = 1, .., n,
(5)
where P−i = P/∆Ai ⊂RA−i, A−i = Q
j̸=i Aj, and Ri ∈RAi×A−i is player i’s payoff matrix.
We note that we differentiate the penalty functions Di to allow agents to have different risk preferences
in different risk metrics. The parameter τi captures a player’s degree of risk-aversion. In this form,
one can see that in a risk-averse game, the players imagine that intermediate adversaries seek to
maximize their cost but are penalized from deviating too far from the opponents’ realized strategies.
As τi →∞they become increasingly risk-averse—and in the extreme, treat their opponents and
environment as adversarial.
Since a NE of the risk-averse game can be qualitatively different from that of the original game, we
now define a risk-averse Nash equilibrium (RNE). For brevity, we do not introduce aggregate and
action-dependent RNE separately, since similar results hold for either formulation.
Definition 4. (Risk-Averse Nash Equilibrium) A risk-averse Nash equilibrium (RNE) of is joint
strategy π∗∈P such that no player has any incentive to unilaterally deviate in the risk adjusted
game—i.e., for all i = 1, ..., n: fi(π∗
i , π∗
−i) ≤fi(πi, π∗
−i) ∀πi ∈∆Ai
Note that since players would like to minimize risk, the direction of the inequality has changed. The
convexity and continuity of the penalty function guarantees that the risk-averse games admit at least
one RNE. A general statement and proof are provided in Theorem 7.
Theorem 2. All aggregate risk-averse games (5) admit at least one RNE.
5

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025
The existence of a RNE is a consequence of the fact that under our risk formulations, players are not
risk averse to the randomness of their own by playing a mixed strategy. This is in stark contrast to
previous works which consider games in which players are risk-averse to all randomness (including
their own), and in which a RNE may not exist (Fiat and Papadimitriou, 2010). Thus, our specific risk
formulations are crucial to our later results.
Finally, we note that the additional convexity induced by the introduction of risk aversion guarantee
is not enough to ensure the computational tractability of the risk-averse Nash equilibrium (see
e.g., (McMahan et al., 2024)). This is not surprising given the fact that computing NE in general
convex games can be intractable in general.
3
RISK-AVERSE QUANTAL RESPONSE EQUILIBRIA IN MATRIX GAMES
Since neither bounded rationality nor risk-aversion alone guarantees computational tractability of their
associated solution concepts, we consider the equilibrium concept that arises out of their combination
and show that it can often be efficiently computed. Interestingly, this echoes work in behavioral
economics in which the combination of risk aversion and bounded rationality has also been found to
be a better predictor of human play (Goeree et al., 2003) than either of the properties alone.
Towards this goal, in the final form of the risk-adjusted game we consider, players’ costs are given by:
f ϵi
i (πi, π−i) = fi(πi, π−i) + ϵiνi(πi) ∀i = 1, .., n,
(6)
where νi is a strictly convex regularizer which gives rise to a set of quantal responses. The natural
outcome of this game is what we term as a risk-averse quantal-response equilibrium (RQE).
Definition 5 (Risk-Averse Quantal Response Equilibrium (RQE)). A risk-averse quantal response
equilibrium of a n-player general-sum finite-action game is a joint strategy π∗∈P such that for
each player i = 1, ..., n:
f ϵi
i (π∗
i , π∗
−i) ≤f ϵi
i (πi, π∗
−i) ∀πi ∈∆Ai.
For any set of convex regularizers νi, it is easy to observe that the game remains a convex game and
thus RQE (as defined) will always exist in all matrix games.
3.1
CONDITIONS FOR THE COMPUTATIONAL TRACTABILITY OF RQE
Given our definition of RQE, we now demonstrate that if players’ risk preferences (i.e., their degree
of risk aversion) and families of quantal response functions (i.e., their bounded rationality parameters)
satisfy a simple relationship, the game admits a RQE that can be efficiently computed using arbitrary
no-regret learning algorithms (e.g., gradient-play or mirror descent) in a decentralized manner.
Importantly this result is independent of the underlying payoffs {Ri}n
i=1.
To derive our results on the computational tractability of RQE under aggregate risk-aversion, we
first introduce a related 2n-player game in which we associate to each original player i an adversary
whose strategy is denoted as pi ∈P−i. Let p = (p1, ..., pn) ∈¯P = Qn
i=1 P−i. In this new game,
each original player’s loss function takes the form:
Ji(πi, π−i, p) = −πT
i Ripi −1
τi
Di(pi, π−i) + ϵiνi(πi).
(7)
For each player pi we associate them to a new loss function which we denote:
¯Ji(π, pi, p−i) = πT
i Ripi + 1
τi
Di(pi, π−i) −
X
j̸=i
ξi,jνj(πj).
(8)
In this 2n player game, the i-th player’s adversary, whose strategy is pi seeks to minimize their loss
¯Ji which is strategically the same as maximizing Ji.
Given the definition of the 2n-player game we show how no-regret learning algorithms can be used
to compute a RQE. To prove this, we first define coarse correlated equilibria (CCE).
6

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025
Definition 6. A coarse correlated equilibrium of the 2n-player game is a probability measure σ on
P × ¯P such that for all i = 1, ..., n:
E(π,p)∼σ[Ji(π, p)] ≤E(π−i,p)∼σ[Ji(π′
i, π−i, p)] ∀π′
i ∈∆Ai
E(π,p)∼σ[ ¯Ji(π, p)] ≤E(π,p−i)∼σ[ ¯Ji(π, p′
i, p−i)] ∀p′
i ∈P−i.
CCE are the natural outcome of no-regret learning algorithms, and we show that CCEs of the 2n-
player game coincide with RQE of the original n-player matrix game. This is a phenomenon known
as equilibrium collapse which is well known to happen in zero-sum games and certain generalizations
of zero-sum games (Cai et al., 2016; Kalogiannis and Panageas, 2023). For brevity we present our
results on 2-player matrix games now and extend the results to n-player setting in Appendix C.3.
To simplify our results we define H1(p1, π2) =
1
τ1 D1(p1, π2) −ξ1ν2(π2) and H2(p2, π1) =
1
τ2 D2(p2, π1) −ξ2ν1(π1). Let ξ∗
1 > 0 and ξ∗
2 > 0 be the smallest values of ξ1 and ξ2 such that
H1(p1, π2) and H2(p2, π1) are concave in π2 and π1 for all p1 and p2 respectively. These parameters
capture the player’s relative degrees of risk aversion, and as we show, for certain instantiations of
risk measures and quantal response functions ξ∗
i =
1
τi for i = 1, 2. The following theorem gives
conditions on ξ∗
1, ξ∗
2 and ϵ1, ϵ2, under which RQEs can be computed through no-regret learning. The
proof is postponed to Appendix C.2.
Theorem 3. Assume the penalty functions that give rise to the players’ risk preferences D1(·, ·)
and D2(·, ·) are jointly convex in both their arguments. If σ is a CCE of the four player game with
ξ1,2 = ξ∗
1 and ξ2,1 = ξ∗
2, and ϵ1ϵ2 ≥ξ∗
1ξ∗
2, then ˆπ1 = Eσ[π1] and ˆπ2 = Eσ[π2] constitute an RQE of
the risk-averse game.
This theorem gives a range of risk aversion and bounded rationality parameters under which an
RQE can be computationally tractable using no-regret learning. This range is independent of the
structure in the underlying game—making the class of tractably computable equilibria universal to
all games. In the case where ξ∗
i =
1
τi , we observe that for any ϵ1, ϵ2 > 0, as τi →∞, the game
becomes solvable. This captures the fact that for any degree of bounded rationality one can compute a
players’ security strategy using no-regret learning—recovering existing results on the computational
tractability of min-max strategies.
To validate this result, we show that the class of computationally tractable RQE is sufficiently rich to
capture the aggregate strategies played by people in matrix games studied in laboratory experiments
in behavioral economics to showcase how human behavior can differ from Nash equilibrium strate-
gies (Selfridge, 1989; Goeree et al., 2003; Selten and Chmura, 2008). In particular, we showcase in
Fig. 1 that for some choice of parameters (ϵj and τj’s) satisfying conditions in Theorem 3, we recover
human behaviors in various matching pennies games investigated in Tables 2 and 3. We provide more
details about the games and experiments in Appendix F.1.
4
RISK-AVERSE QUANTAL RESPONSE EQUILIBRIA IN MARKOV GAMES
In this section, we extend our results to finite-horizon Markov games, or stochastic games (Shapley,
1953) which allow us to model dynamic games played out over Markov decision processes (MDP).
A Markov game can be seen as a sequential matrix game with stochastic dynamics. In this paper,
we consider general-sum finite-horizon Markov games involving n players, represented as MG =
{H, S, {Ai}i∈[n], {Ri,h, Pi,h}i∈[n],h∈[H]}. Here, H is the time horizon length of the Markov game
and S = {1, 2, · · · , S} represents the state space of the underlying MDP with size S. We also adopt
the same notation as in Section 2, and let {Ai}i∈[n] represent the action spaces of each player, each
with cardinality |Ai| = Ai. Similarly, the joint action space is given by A, a joint action profile is
a ∈A, and P is the product policy space. Similarly, Ri,h represents the utility or reward function
of the i-th player at time step h for any (i, h) ∈[n] × [H] and Ri,h(s, a) represents the immediate
reward (or utility) received by the i-th player given state-action pair (s, a). For simplicity, we assume
Ri,h is deterministic. Lastly, the dynamics are captured by transition kernels Pi,h : S × A 7→∆S
where Pi,h(s′ | s, a) which capture probability transitioning from current state s to the next state s′
conditioned on the joint action a.
Markov policies and value functions. In the classical setup of finite-horizon Markov games,
players are assumed to play over the space of Markov policies, where at any state s at any time
7

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025
step h ∈[H], the action selection rule depends only on the current state s, and is independent
of previous trajectories and other players. Specifically, the i-th player or agent executes actions
according to a policy πi = {πi,h : S 7→∆Ai}1≤h≤H, with the probability of selecting action a
in state s at time step h given by πi,h(a | s). Since we are operating in a finite horizon regime, it
is natural to assume the policies are time-dependent. For simplicity, we define the joint policy of
all agents as a product policy defined as π = (π1, . . . , πn) : S × [H] 7→P and the joint policy
space as Π. As such, the joint action profile a of all agents is drawn from distribution specified by
πh(· | s) = (π1,h, π2,h . . . , πn,h)(· | s) ∈P conditioned on state s at time step h. For any given π,
we employ π−i : S × [H] 7→P−i to represent the policies of all agents excluding the i-th agent.
4.1
RISK-AVERSE MARKOV GAMES
Given these definitions, we now generalize Markov games by allowing agents to be risk-averse to
both the uncertainties arising from other agents’ strategies and from the stochastic dynamics. This
results in a new formulation of risk-averse Markov games (RAMGs). To address the two sources
of risk-aversion we allow agents to have different risk preferences for their opponents and for the
environment. To do so we fix two penalty functions {Dpol,i(·, ·)}i∈[n] and {Denv,i(·, ·)}i∈[n], which
in turn give rise to two risk metrics. This allows us to define the following two functions which
separately capture the risk associated with other players’ actions and the environment respectively:
∀i ∈[n] :
f π
pol,i(Qi) = sup
pi∈Pi
−πT
i Qipi −Dpol,i(pi, π−i),
∀i ∈[n] :
fenv,i(R, P, V ) =
inf
e
P ∈∆S
h
R + ePV + Denv,i( eP, P)
i
,
(9)
for any joint policy π, where Qi ∈RAi×P
j̸=i Aj, R ∈RA, V ∈RS will be used to represent
cumulative payoff matrices and P ∈∆S, represents the dynamics of the MDP. Note that for
simplicity, we choose the same {Dpol,i}i∈[n] and {Denv,i}i∈[n] for all time steps h ∈[H], though
this can be considered to be time dependent as well.
Given the definition of these two penalty functions f π
pol,i(·) and fenv,i(·), we can now define an
agent’s cumulative risk in a RAMG. For a risk-averse agent i their goal is now to minimize their
own long-term risk, which can be captured by a risk-averse value function {Vi,h(π)}h∈[H], where
Vi,h(π) : S 7→R for any joint strategy π ∈Π. This can be defined recursively as follows: for a given
joint policy π, for all (h, s) ∈[H] × S,
Vi,h(π; s) = f π
pol,i (Qi,h(π; s, :))
(10)
where Qi,h(π; s, a) = fenv,i (Ri,h(s, a), Ph,s,a, Vi,h+1(π)) and Ph,s,a := Ph(· | s, a) ∈R1×S.
To parse this definition, we observe that Qi,h(π; s, :) ∈RAi×P
j̸=i Aj represents a payoff matrix for
the i-th player at state s and time step h, where the value at the ai-th row and the a−i-th column
is specified by Qi,h(π; s, a) with a = (ai, a−i) which captures an agents’ cumulative risk if joint
action a is executed at state s and time h, and the policy π is followed subsequently. This can also be
captured concisely through a recursive definition:
Vi,h(π; s) = f π
pol,i ◦fenv,i
 Ri,h(s, :), Ph,s,:,

f π
pol,i ◦fenv,i
 Ri,h+1, Ph+1, · · ·

.
We remark that this definition reduces to the classical setup of multi-agent reinforcement learn-
ing (Zhang et al., 2021a) when agents are risk-neutral and to the well studied setup of risk-sensitive
reinforcement learning (Shen et al., 2014) when there is only one agent.
As before, we focus on the computation of risk-averse quantal response equilibria in Markov games.
To do, we constrain players to quantal responses by regularizing their value functions as follows:
∀(i, h, s) ∈[n] × [H] × S :
V ϵi
i,h(π; s) = Vi,h(π; s) + ϵiνi(πi),
(11)
where {ϵi ≥0}i∈[n] capture players’ degrees of bounded rationality. To define Markov RQE we
denote πi,−h := {πi,t}t=1,2,3,··· ,h−1,h+1,··· ,H as agent i’s policy over all times other than h.
Definition 7 (Markov RQE). A product policy π = π1 × · · · × πn ∈Π is said to be a risk-averse
quantal response equilibrium of RAMG if:
∀(i, s, h) ∈[n] × S × [H] :
V ϵi
i,h(π; s) ≤
min
π′
h:S7→∆Ai
V ϵi
i,h
 (π′
h, πi,−h) × π−i; s

,
(12)
where νi(·) is a strictly convex function over the simplex.
8

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025
4.2
COMPUTING AND APPROXIMATING MARKOV RQE
Given our setup we now investigate how to compute Markov RQE, both with full information over the
dynamics and rewards and without. For the full-information regime we propose a modified form of
dynamic programming, in which we work backwards from time h = H and then recursively compute
the RQE until step h = 0. Towards this goal, at each time step h, for all (i, h, s, a) ∈[n]×[H]×S×A,
we construct the payoff matrices for the underlying for all agents at any state s at time step h as
∀(i, s, h) ∈[n] × S × [H] : bQi,h(s, a) = Ri,h(s, a) + inf
e
P ∈∆S
eP bVi,h+1 + Denv,i( eP, Ph,s,a). (13)
These payoff matrices capture both the future payoffs as well as the risk associated with the stochastic
transitions in the MDP associated with a joint action a. Together, they define a matrix game at state s
and time h, for which we can compute a RQE using the results presented in Section 2. We denote
the routine for computing a RQE of a matrix game as RQE(·). Proceeding recursively, we compute
the RQE at time t + 1 and use the resulting policies to define the underlying payoff matrices at time
t. We summarize the algorithm for computing Markov RQE in Algorithm 1 in the appendix. The
following theorem guarantees that the procedure will output a Markov RQE.
Theorem 4. For any RAMG MG, assume the penalty functions that give rise to the players’ risk
preferences {Dpol,i(·, ·)} are jointly convex in both of their arguments. If, for all (s, h) ∈S × [H],
ϵi ≥P
j̸=i ξ∗
j,i for all (i, j) ∈[n] × [n], where ξ∗
i,j is defined as in Theorem 9 for given Dpol,i(·, ·)
and νj, then the output policy bπ from Algorithm 1 is a Markov RQE of MG.
A consequence of this result is that a class of Markov RQE are computationally tractable to compute
via no-regret learning in finite-horizon Markov games. We remark that this is in stark contrast to
both Markov Nash equilibria and Markov quantal response equilibria which cannot efficiently be
computed in general-sum Markov games (Daskalakis et al., 2023b).
Computing Markov RQE in unknown Markov Games.
The previous results focused on the
case when the dynamics and rewards of the RAMG are known. In practice, especially in multi-agent
reinforcement learning, the environments can be complex and unknown and must be learned by
interacting with (i.e., sampling from) the environments. In this subsection, we focus on such scenarios
and provide the theoretical guarantees for Algorithm 1.
We focus on a fundamental problem setup which assumes access to a generative model or a simulator
(Kearns and Singh, 1998; Agarwal et al., 2020). This allows us to collect N independent samples for
each state-action pair generated based on the true environment {Ri,h, Ph}i∈[n],h∈[H]:
∀(s, a, j) ∈S × A × [n] :
si,s,a,h
i.i.d
∼Ph(· | s, a),
ri
j,s,a,h = Rj,h(s, a),
i ∈[N].
(14)
The total sample size is, therefore, Nall := NS Q
i∈[n] Ai.
For problems we propose a model-based approach to the computation of Markov RQE which first
constructs an empirical reward function and nominal transition kernel based on the collected samples
and then applies Algorithm 1 to learn a Markov RQE. First, the empirical reward function and
transition kernel bP ∈RS Qn
i=1 Ai×S are constructed from the empirical frequency of state transitions,
∀(s, a, j, h) : bRj,h(s, a) = r1
j,s,a,h
and
bPh(s′ | s, a) = 1
N
N
X
i=1
1

si,s,a = s′	
.
(15)
Then with such empirical reward and transition, we can apply the oracle summarized in Algorithm 1
to compute Markov RQE using model-based MARL. The following theorem provides the first
finite-sample guarantees for the computation or Markov RQE.
Theorem 5. For any RAMG MG, we consider penalty functions {Denv,i(·, ·)}i∈[n] are L-Lipschitz
w.r.t the ℓ1 norm of the second argument with any fixed first argument. Applying Algorithm 1 with the
estimated reward { bRj,h} and transition kernels { bPh}h∈[H] as input, the output solution bπ is an δ-
RQE of MG. Namely, we have max(i,s,h)∈[n]×S×[H]
n
V ϵi
i,h(bπ; s)−minπ′
h:S7→∆Ai V ϵi
i,h((π′
h, bπi,−h)×
9

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025
Figure 2: Cliff Walk Description and Results: The Cliff Walk grid-world is depicted here with color
codes of grids: black is the cliff, blue and pink are agents/players 1 and 2’s goals respectively. The
agents’ proximity to one another increases the randomness in the dynamics making falling into one
of the cliff states more likely. Agent 2’s policy in the left figure showcases more risk-aversion and
less bounded rationality than on the right.
bπ−i; s)
o
≤δ as long as the total number of samples satisfies
Nall = NS
Y
i∈[n]
Ai ≥8S
Y
i∈[n]
AiHL
v
u
u
t S
N log
 2SH
Y
i∈[n]
Ai/δ

.
The proof is postponed to Appendix E. We remark that L can be some constant for various penalty
function, such as L = 1 when {Denv,i}i∈[n] are defined as any ℓp norm including total variation (TV).
We also note that our result suffers from what is known as the curse of mutliagency (Bai et al., 2020)
through the dependence on Q
i∈[n] Ai.
4.3
EXPERIMENTS AND EVALUATION
We consider a grid-world problem to test our algorithm (Algorithm 1) and showcase the effects of
risk-aversion and bounded rationality in games.
Cliff Walk Environment description: A grid consists of some tiles representing a cliff where they
will remain stuck for all time and goal states for agents as well as goal states of agents. The cliff is the
black grid with rewards −2. Agents/players are rewarded 0 for taking each step and 1 for reaching
their respective goals. Agents actions are {up,down,left,right} and they are followed with probability
pd = 0.9 with random movements happening otherwise. To introduce multi-agent effects we reduce
pd to 0.5 when the agents are at least a grid cell apart— making the likelihood of falling into the cliff
higher. The episode horizon H = 200 and the joint state space is the tuple of players’ positions.
Results Discussion: We present two results in Fig. 2. For both results, agent 1 starts at the 5th row
and 3rd column of the cliff-walking grid-world, and agent 2 starts at the 2nd row and 3rd column
grid position. In both figures, the red and blue paths depict the maximum likelihood paths taken by
agents 1 and 2 respectively. Agent 2’s policy in the left figure showcases more risk-aversion and less
bounded rationality resulting in them preferring to hide far from obstacles than run the risk of falling
off the path. On the right, agent 2 successfully reaches their goal. The equilibrium strategy of agent
1 changes in both scenarios: a more risk-seeking agent 2 forces agent 1—in an effort to minimize
risk—to wait until the path is clear to attempt the journey to its goal.
5
CONCLUSION
By incorporating risk aversion and bounded rationality into agents’ decision-making processes, we
introduced a new class of equilibria for matrix games and finite-horizon Markov games: RQE. RQE
were shown to align well with observed human behavior and we provided theoretical results showing
that classes of RQE are tractably computable in all finite horizon Markov games. We also provided
sample complexity results in the generative modeling setting for multi-agent reinforcement learning.
Altogether, our results open the doors to the principled development of new MARL algorithms.
10

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The work of LS is supported in part by the Resnick Institute and Computing, Data, and Society
Postdoctoral Fellowship at California Institute of Technology. KP acknowledges support from the
‘PIMCO Postdoctoral Fellow in Data Science’ fellowship at the California Institute of Technology.
EM acknowledges support from NSF Award 2240110.
REFERENCES
A. Agarwal, S. Kakade, and L. F. Yang. Model-based reinforcement learning with a generative model
is minimax optimal. In Conference on Learning Theory, pages 67–83. PMLR, 2020. 9
A. Ahmadi-Javid. Entropic value-at-risk: A new coherent risk measure. Journal of Optimization
Theory and Applications, 155:1105–1123, 2012. 19, 20
P. Auer, T. Jaksch, and R. Ortner. Near-optimal regret bounds for reinforcement learning. Advances
in neural information processing systems, 21, 2008. 28
R. J. Aumann. Subjectivity and correlation in randomized strategies. Journal of Mathematical
Economics, 1(1):67–96, 1974. 16
R. J. Aumann. Correlated equilibrium as an expression of bayesian rationality. Econometrica, 55(1):
1–18, 1987. 16
Y. Bai, C. Jin, and T. Yu. Near-optimal reinforcement learning with self-play. Advances in neural
information processing systems, 33:2159–2170, 2020. 10
T. Basar. Nash equilibria of risk-sensitive nonlinear stochastic differential games. Journal of
Optimization Theory and Applications, 100(3):479–498, 1999. 17, 18
A. Beck. First-order methods in optimization. SIAM, 2017. 30
J. Blanchet, M. Lu, T. Zhang, and H. Zhong. Double pessimism is provably efficient for distribution-
ally robust offline reinforcement learning: Generic algorithm and robust partial coverage. Advances
in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36, 2024. 18
V. Borkar. Risk-sensitive control, single controller games and linear programming. Journal of
Dynamics and Games, 11, 01 2023. 17, 19
J. N. Brown and R. Rosenthal. Testing the minimax hypothesis: A re-examination of o’neill’s game
experiment. Econometrica, 58(5):1065–81, 1990. 17
Y. Cai, O. Candogan, C. Daskalakis, and C. Papadimitriou. Zero-sum polymatrix games: A general-
ization of minmax. Mathematics of Operations Research, 41(2):648–655, 2016. 7, 16
C. M. Capra, J. K. Goeree, R. Gomez, and C. A. Holt. Learning and noisy equilibrium behavior
in an experimental study of imperfect price competition. International Economic Review, 43(3):
613–636, 2002. 2
S. Cen, Y. Wei, and Y. Chi. Fast policy extragradient methods for competitive games with entropy
regularization. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:27952–27964, 2021. 3, 17
N. Cesa-Bianchi and G. Lugosi. Prediction, learning, and games. Cambridge University Press, 2006.
ISBN 978-0-511-54692-1. 1, 2, 16
C. Daskalakis. On the complexity of approximating a nash equilibrium. ACM Transactions on
Algorithms (TALG), 9(3):1–35, 2013. 1, 3, 16
C. Daskalakis, N. Golowich, N. Haghtalab, and A. Shetty. Smooth nash equilibria: Algorithms and
complexity. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.12226, 2023a. 16
C. Daskalakis, N. Golowich, and K. Zhang. The complexity of markov equilibrium in stochastic
games. In G. Neu and L. Rosasco, editors, Proceedings of Thirty Sixth Conference on Learning
Theory, volume 195 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pages 4180–4234. PMLR,
12–15 Jul 2023b. 2, 9, 16
11

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025
E. Dekel and D. Fudenberg. Rational behavior with payoff uncertainty. Journal of Economic Theory,
52(2):243–267, 1990. 2
I. Erev and A. Roth. Predicting how people play games: Reinforcement learning in experimental
games with unique, mixed strategy equilibria. American Economic Review, 88(4):848–81, 1998. 2,
17
H. Eriksson, D. Basu, M. Alibeigi, and C. Dimitrakakis. Risk-sensitive bayesian games for multi-
agent reinforcement learning under policy uncertainty. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.10045, 2022.
17
B. P. Evans and S. Ganesh. Learning and calibrating heterogeneous bounded rational market behaviour
with multi-agent reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.00787, 2024. 3, 17
E. Even-Dar, Y. Mansour, and U. Nadav. On the convergence of regret minimization dynamics in
concave games. In Proceedings of the forty-first annual ACM symposium on Theory of computing,
pages 523–532, 2009. 16
A. Fiat and C. Papadimitriou. When the players are not expectation maximizers. In Algorithmic
Game Theory: Third International Symposium, SAGT 2010, Athens, Greece, October 18-20, 2010.
Proceedings 3, pages 1–14. Springer, 2010. 4, 6, 16, 18
H. Föllmer and A. Schied. Convex measures of risk and trading constraints. Finance and Stochastics,
6(4):429–447, 2002. 4, 5, 19, 20
S. Ganesh, N. Vadori, M. Xu, H. Zheng, P. Reddy, and M. Veloso. Reinforcement learning for market
making in a multi-agent dealer market. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2019.
17
Y. Gao, K. Y. C. Lui, and P. Hernandez-Leal. Robust risk-sensitive reinforcement learning agents for
trading markets. arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.08083, 2021. 17
I. M. Gemp and S. Mahadevan. Online monotone games. ArXiv, abs/1710.07328, 2017. 23
J. K. Goeree and C. A. Holt. Stochastic game theory: For playing games, not just for doing theory.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 96(19):10564–10567, 1999. 2
J. K. Goeree, C. A. Holt, and T. R. Palfrey. Risk averse behavior in generalized matching pennies
games. Games and Economic Behavior, 45(1):97–113, 2003. 2, 3, 4, 6, 7, 17, 30
K. Goeree and T. Offerman. Efficiency in auctions with private and common values: An experimental
study. American Economic Review, 92(3):625–643, June 2002. 2, 17
C. Gollier. The economics of risk and time. MIT press, 2001. 2
N. Golowich, S. Pattathil, and C. Daskalakis. Tight last-iterate convergence rates for no-regret learning
in multi-player games. Advances in neural information processing systems, 33:20766–20778, 2020.
16
S. He, S. Han, S. Su, S. Han, S. Zou, and F. Miao. Robust multi-agent reinforcement learning with
state uncertainty. Transactions on Machine Learning Research, 2023. ISSN 2835-8856. 18
T. Ho, C. Camerer, and J.-K. Chong. A cognitive hierarchy model games. The Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 119:861–898, 02 2004. 17
G. N. Iyengar. Robust dynamic programming. Mathematics of Operations Research, 30(2):257–280,
2005. 17
A. P. Jacob, D. J. Wu, G. Farina, A. Lerer, H. Hu, A. Bakhtin, J. Andreas, and N. Brown. Modeling
strong and human-like gameplay with kl-regularized search. In International Conference on
Machine Learning, pages 9695–9728. PMLR, 2022. 3, 17
D. Jacobson. Optimal stochastic linear systems with exponential performance criteria and their
relation to deterministic differential games. IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control, 18(2):
124–131, 1973. 17
12

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025
D. Kahneman and A. Tversky. Prospect theory: An analysis of decision under risk. Econometrica,
47(2):263–291, 1979. 2
F. Kalogiannis and I. Panageas. Zero-sum polymatrix markov games: Equilibrium collapse and
efficient computation of nash equilibria, 2023. 7, 16
S. Kannan, M. Kearns, J. Morgenstern, M. Pai, A. Roth, R. Vohra, and Z. S. Wu. Fairness incentives
for myopic agents. In Proceedings of the 2017 ACM Conference on Economics and Computation,
pages 369–386, 2017. 1
M. Kearns and S. Singh. Finite-sample convergence rates for q-learning and indirect algorithms.
Advances in neural information processing systems, 11, 1998. 9
S. Leonardos, G. Piliouras, and K. Spendlove. Exploration-exploitation in multi-agent competition:
Convergence with bounded rationality. In M. Ranzato, A. Beygelzimer, Y. Dauphin, P. Liang, and
J. W. Vaughan, editors, Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 34, pages
26318–26331. Curran Associates, Inc., 2021. 3, 4, 17
R. D. Luce. Individual Choice Behavior: A Theoretical analysis. Wiley, New York, NY, USA, 1959.
2, 3, 17
E. Mazumdar, L. J. Ratliff, and S. S. Sastry. On gradient-based learning in continuous games. SIAM
Journal on Mathematics of Data Science, 2(1):103–131, 2020. 1
R. D. McKelvey and T. R. Palfrey. An experimental study of the centipede game. Econometrica, 60
(4):803–836, 1992. 17
R. D. McKelvey and T. R. Palfrey. Quantal response equilibria for normal form games. Games and
economic behavior, 10(1):6–38, 1995. 2, 3, 17
R. D. McKelvey and T. R. Palfrey. Quantal response equilibria for extensive form games. Experimental
economics, 1:9–41, 1998. 3, 17
J. McMahan, G. Artiglio, and Q. Xie. Roping in uncertainty: Robustness and regularization in
markov games. In Forty-first International Conference on Machine Learning, 2024. 6, 18, 20
P. Mertikopoulos and W. H. Sandholm. Learning in games via reinforcement and regularization.
Mathematics of Operations Research, 41(4):1297–1324, 2016. 3, 4, 17, 20
P. Mertikopoulos, C. Papadimitriou, and G. Piliouras. Cycles in adversarial regularized learning. In
Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth Annual ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms, page
2703–2717, USA, 2018. Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics. 1
A.-H. Mohsenian-Rad, V. W. Wong, J. Jatskevich, R. Schober, and A. Leon-Garcia. Autonomous
demand-side management based on game-theoretic energy consumption scheduling for the future
smart grid. IEEE transactions on Smart Grid, 1(3):320–331, 2010. 1
J. Moon, T. E. Duncan, and T. Basar. Risk-sensitive zero-sum differential games. IEEE Transactions
on Automatic Control, 64(4):1503–1518, 2019. 17, 18
H. Moulin and J. P. Vial. Strategically zero-sum games: The class of games whose completely mixed
equilibria cannot be improved upon. International Journal of Game Theory, 7(3):201–221, 1978.
16
R. Munos, M. Valko, D. Calandriello, M. G. Azar, M. Rowland, Z. D. Guo, Y. Tang, M. Geist,
T. Mesnard, C. Fiegel, A. Michi, M. Selvi, S. Girgin, N. Momchev, O. Bachem, D. J. Mankowitz,
D. Precup, and B. Piot. Nash learning from human feedback. In Forty-first International Conference
on Machine Learning, 2024. 1
J. Nash. Non-cooperative games. ANNALS OF MATHEMATICS, 54(2), 1951. 3
J. F. Nash. Non-cooperative games. Princeton University, 1950. 1
B. O’Neill. Nonmetric test of the minimax theory of two-person zerosum games. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 84(7):2106–2109, 1987. 17
13

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025
R. Oprea and N. Robalino. Are humans more averse to aggregate risk? testing an evolutionary
economic theory. 2024. 5
K. Panaganti and D. Kalathil. Sample complexity of robust reinforcement learning with a generative
model. In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics (AISTATS), pages
9582–9602, 2022. 17, 28
K. Panaganti, Z. Xu, D. Kalathil, and M. Ghavamzadeh. Robust reinforcement learning using offline
data. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2022. 17
W. Qiu, X. Wang, R. Yu, R. Wang, X. He, B. An, S. Obraztsova, and Z. Rabinovich. Rmix:
Learning risk-sensitive policies for cooperative reinforcement learning agents. Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems, 34:23049–23062, 2021. 17
J. B. Rosen. Existence and uniqueness of equilibrium points for concave n-person games. Economet-
rica, 33(3):520–534, 1965. 20, 21
T. Roughgarden. Intrinsic robustness of the price of anarchy. Journal of the ACM (JACM), 62(5):
1–42, 2015. 16
O. G. Selfridge. Adaptive strategies of learning a study of two-person zero-sum competition. In
Proceedings of the sixth international workshop on Machine learning, pages 412–415. Elsevier,
1989. 7
R. Selten and T. Chmura. Stationary concepts for experimental 2x2-games. American Economic
Review, 98(3):938–966, 2008. 3, 7, 29, 30
L. S. Shapley. Stochastic games. Proceedings of the national academy of sciences, 39(10):1095–1100,
1953. 7
S. Shen, C. Ma, C. Li, W. Liu, Y. Fu, S. Mei, X. Liu, and C. Wang. Riskq: risk-sensitive multi-agent
reinforcement learning value factorization. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
36:34791–34825, 2023. 17
Y. Shen, W. Stannat, and K. Obermayer. Risk-sensitive markov control processes. SIAM Journal on
Control and Optimization, 51(5):3652–3672, 2013. 17
Y. Shen, M. J. Tobia, T. Sommer, and K. Obermayer. Risk-sensitive reinforcement learning. Neural
computation, 26(7):1298–1328, 2014. 4, 8, 17, 18, 19
L. Shi, G. Li, Y. Wei, Y. Chen, M. Geist, and Y. Chi. The curious price of distributional robustness
in reinforcement learning with a generative model. Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems, 2023. 28
L. Shi, E. Mazumdar, Y. Chi, and A. Wierman. Sample-efficient robust multi-agent reinforcement
learning in the face of environmental uncertainty. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.18909, 2024. 18
O. Slumbers, D. H. Mguni, S. B. Blumberg, S. M. Mcaleer, Y. Yang, and J. Wang. A game-theoretic
framework for managing risk in multi-agent systems. In International Conference on Machine
Learning, pages 32059–32087. PMLR, 2023. 17
S. Sokota, R. D’Orazio, J. Z. Kolter, N. Loizou, M. Lanctot, I. Mitliagkas, N. Brown, and C. Kroer. A
unified approach to reinforcement learning, quantal response equilibria, and two-player zero-sum
games. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations, 2023. 3, 4, 17, 20
Y. Sun, T. Liu, P. R. Kumar, and S. Shahrampour. Linear convergence of independent natural policy
gradient in games with entropy regularization. IEEE Control Systems Letters, 8:1217–1222, 2024.
4
A. Tversky and D. Kahneman. Advances in prospect theory: Cumulative representation of uncertainty.
Journal of Risk and Uncertainty, 5:297–323, 1992. 2, 3, 4
M. Verma, S. Bhambri, and S. Kambhampati. On the brittle foundations of react prompting for
agentic large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.13966, 2024. 1
14

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025
Y. Viossat and A. Zapechelnyuk. No-regret dynamics and fictitious play. Journal of Economic Theory,
148(2):825–842, 2013. 2, 16
Z. Wang, Y. Shen, M. M. Zavlanos, and K. H. Johansson. Learning of nash equilibria in risk-averse
games. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.10399, 2024. 17
M. P. Wellman and P. R. Wurman. Market-aware agents for a multiagent world. Robotics and
Autonomous Systems, 24(3-4):115–125, 1998. 1
Z. Xu∗, K. Panaganti∗, and D. Kalathil. Improved sample complexity bounds for distributionally
robust reinforcement learning. In Proceedings of The 25th International Conference on Artificial
Intelligence and Statistics. Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, 2023. 17, 28
A. Yekkehkhany, T. Murray, and R. Nagi. Risk-averse equilibrium for games. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2002.08414, 2020. 17
K. Zhang, T. Sun, Y. Tao, S. Genc, S. Mallya, and T. Basar. Robust multi-agent reinforcement learning
with model uncertainty. Advances in neural information processing systems, 33:10571–10583,
2020. 18
K. Zhang, Z. Yang, and T. Ba¸sar. Multi-agent reinforcement learning: A selective overview of
theories and algorithms. Handbook of reinforcement learning and control, pages 321–384, 2021a.
1, 8
R. Zhang, Y. Hu, and N. Li. Soft robust MDPs and risk-sensitive MDPs: Equivalence, policy gradient,
and sample complexity. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations,
2024. 17
S. Zhang, B. Liu, and S. Whiteson. Mean-variance policy iteration for risk-averse reinforcement
learning. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 35, pages
10905–10913, 2021b. 17
15
