IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT VEHICLES, VOL. 9, NO. 1, JANUARY 2024
1615
Robust Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning Method
Based on Adversarial Domain Randomization for
Real-World Dual-UAV Cooperation
Shutong Chen
, Guanjun Liu
, Senior Member, IEEE, Ziyuan Zhou
, Kaiwen Zhang
,
and Jiacun Wang
, Senior Member, IEEE
Abstract—A control system of multiple unmanned aerial vehi-
cles (multi-UAV) is generally very complex when they complete a
task in a closely-cooperative manner, e.g. two UAVs cooperatively
transport a package of goods. Multi-agent reinforcement learning
(MARL) offers a promising solution for such a complex control.
However, MARL heavily relies on trial-and-error explorations,
facing a big challenge in gathering real-world training data. Simu-
lation environments are commonly used to overcome this challenge,
i.e., a control policy is trained in a simulation environment and then
transferred into a real-world system. But there often exists a gap
between simulation and reality and thus a successful transfer is not
guaranteed easily. The domain randomization method provides a
workable way to bridge this gap. Nevertheless, the traditional one
used in a policy training often suffers from slow convergence and
results in an unstable decision policy. To address these issues, this
article proposes an adversarial domain randomization method. It
utilizes an adversarial generator as a “nature player” to generate a
more reasonable training environment so that the trained decision
policy can deal with complex situations. Additionally, we improve
the prioritized experience replay method by which we can sample
those critical experiences, increasing the convergence speed of a
training without decreasing the performance of the trained policy.
We apply our method to a real-world task of dual-UAV cooperative
transportation, and experiments illustrate its effectiveness com-
pared to traditional ones.
Index Terms—Multi-agent reinforcement learning, sim2real
transfer,adversarialdomainrandomization,prioritizedexperience
replay, dual-UAV cooperative transportation.
Manuscript received 4 June 2023; revised 22 July 2023; accepted 13 August
2023. Date of publication 22 August 2023; date of current version 23 February
2024. This work was supported in part by the Shanghai Science and Technology
Committee under Grant 22511105500, in part by the National Nature Science
Foundation of China under Grants 62172299 and 62032019, and in part by the
Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities under Grant 2023-4-
YB-05. (Corresponding author: Guanjun Liu.)
Shutong Chen, Guanjun Liu, Ziyuan Zhou, and Kaiwen Zhang are with the
Department of Computer Science, Tongji University, Shanghai 201804, China
(e-mail: 2132949@tongji.edu.cn; liuguanjun@tongji.edu.cn; ziyuanzhou@
tongji.edu.cn; 2210133@tongji.edu.cn).
Jiacun Wang is with the Department of Computer Science and Software
Engineering, Monmouth University, West Long Branch, NJ 07764 USA (e-mail:
jwang@monmouth.edu).
Color versions of one or more ﬁgures in this article are available at
https://doi.org/10.1109/TIV.2023.3307134.
Digital Object Identiﬁer 10.1109/TIV.2023.3307134
I. INTRODUCTION
M
ULTIPLE unmanned aerial vehicles (multi-UAV) ex-
hibit a high complexity when they cooperatively com-
plete a task. There are two types of control systems of multi-
UAV: traditional and intelligent ones. The former relies on the
known mathematical models and physical laws governing UAV
motion [1], [2], [3], [4]. It often utilizes precise information
about the state of UAVs to accomplish a speciﬁc task. As for
the latter, multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) is an
important method to generate a control policy of a multi-UAV
system. Such a policy is trained through extensive trial-and-error
explorations and decides the movements of these UAVs based
on observable information.
For multi-UAV cooperative tasks, intelligent control systems
generally offer advantages over traditional ones. The latter relies
on control algorithms that can only handle those known and
predictable states. In contrast, the former has the ability to adapt
to the change of situations and provide proper policies [5].
Furthermore, compared to the latter’s heavy reliance on precise
information about the state of UAVs, the former exhibits greater
tolerance for errors in states. In addition, an intelligent control
policy can be distributed to each UAV, avoiding centralized con-
trol and obtaining great ﬂexibility on a multi-UAV cooperative
task completion.
Simulation environments are often used to train control poli-
cies of multi-UAV systems, including cooperative navigation of
path planning, target tracking, and cooperative visual coverage
of target search [6], [7], [8], [9], [10]. Indeed, these studies focus
on abstract problems in simulation environments in order to
show the potential of MARL in enhancing the adaptability and
efﬁciency of multi-UAV cooperation. However, the complexity
and uncertainty in the real world, such as noise, sensor errors,
and dynamic changes, pose signiﬁcant challenges when the
MARL policies trained in simulation environments are applied
in real-world environments. The aforementioned studies also
highlight these challenges. Therefore, it is necessary to build a
good bridge from simulation to the real world. According to the
work in [11] and [12], the domain randomization method [13]
is such an effective bridge.
We can observe two shortcomings when applying the tra-
ditional domain randomization method to MARL. Firstly, a
control policy trained with it is often unstable when dealing
2379-8858 © 2023 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Texas at Arlington. Downloaded on June 27,2026 at 06:13:32 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

1616
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT VEHICLES, VOL. 9, NO. 1, JANUARY 2024
with tasks in environments generated with different degrees of
domain randomization parameters. Secondly, a training process
usually converges slowly, resulting in a high training cost. To
overcome these shortcomings, we do the related study and obtain
the following results:
1) Weintroduceanadversarialdomainrandomization(ADR)
method. The MARL with ADR is deﬁned as an adversarial
stationary Markov game and we theoretically analyze the
existence of Nash equilibrium in such a game. Moreover,
we design an algorithm that utilizes a “nature player” to
generate a high-quality training environment and thus can
train a stable control policy.
2) We improve the priority experience replay method that
is used in our domain randomization method in order
to increase the convergence speed of a training without
decreasing the performance of a trained policy.
3) We apply the proposed method to a dual-UAV cooperative
transportation task, train the decision policy in a simula-
tion environment and transfer the policy to our real-world
dual-UAV control system. Our experiments illustrate the
effectiveness of our method compared to traditional ones.
The rest of this article is organized as follows: Section II
introduces the related studies on MARL in multi-UAV tasks,
including domain randomization and prioritized experience re-
play. Section III recalls the underlying theoretical model and
experimental methodology. Section IV provides a detailed ex-
planation of the theoretical foundation of the proposed method,
as well as its framework and speciﬁc details. Section V presents
the experiments in a dual-UAV cooperative transportation task.
Section VI concludes this article brieﬂy.
II. RELATED WORK
A. MARL for UAV Control
In the ﬁeld of intelligent transportation, the problem of col-
laborative goal optimization of multiple agents is important
and challenging [14]. Compared with a single UAV system, a
multi-UAV system shows superior performance in terms of time
efﬁciency, cost-effectiveness, collaborative action, complemen-
tary information, fault tolerance, and ﬂexibility [15]. MARL has
been used to train their control policies which enable them to
accomplish a cooperative task [16].
MARL-based approaches for controlling clusters of multi-
UAVinvarioustasksareinvestigated[17],[18],[19],[20].In[9],
[21], [22], [23], [24], [25], MARL is introduced to train control
policies of swarms of UAVs to perform speciﬁc tasks such as en-
vironmental monitoring. These approaches include distributed
reinforcementlearningandcommunicationreinforcementlearn-
ing. A simulation scenario for UAVs transportation in a city and
an improved Multi-Actor-Attention-Critic (MAAC) method to
trainthecontrolpolicyformulti-UAVcooperativetransportation
in a city are discussed in [26] and [27]. The study in [28] shows
the advantages of hierarchical optimization for dealing with
complex tasks in multi-UAV control systems.
It is worth noting that the above studies are conducted in
various simulation environments and not experimentally vali-
dated in the real world. Bridging the gap between simulation and
real-world environments to apply trained policies on real-world
UAV control systems remains a signiﬁcant challenge.
B. Domain Randomization
Recently, a series of sim2real techniques [12] are proposed to
bridge the gap between simulation and real-world environments.
For example, Tobin et al. [13] propose a domain randomization
method for the ﬁrst time such that the deep neural network
trained with the simulated images can be transferred to the real
world. In the ﬁeld of deep reinforcement learning, some stud-
ies also employ the domain randomization method to transfer
policies trained in simulation environments to the real world.
By employing it, Andrychowicz et al. [29] simulate changes
in the physical properties of the system within a simulation
environment and transfer the trained policy to a physical robot,
achieving dexterous manipulation in robotics. The study in [30]
trains an MARL policy in a domain randomization experimental
environment and transfers it to the real-world for controlling
multiple autonomous vehicles.
The traditional domain randomization method often employs
a uniform selection of domain randomization parameters within
predeﬁned ranges to generate a training environment. However,
this method often results in an unstable reinforcement learning
policy, characterized by high-variance performance when ap-
plied to environments generated by different degrees of domain
randomization parameters [31]. In particular, it has to struggle to
deal with complex situations. An active domain randomization
method [31] introduces a discriminator that evaluates whether
the experience of the current episode is from a reference or
a randomization environment and selects the value of domain
randomization parameters to generate the environment during
the next training. Raparthy et al. [32] further improves this active
method by using meta-learning. However, both of them rely on a
reference environment that is based on prior knowledge and thus
perform poorly in environments with multiple randomization
parameters. The method in [33] optimizes the selection process
of domain randomization environments based on Bayesian opti-
mization, which collects a sufﬁcient number of real experiences
in a real-world environment. This method is more suitable for
the controlled tasks such as mechanical arm control but is not
too feasible for high-risk tasks such as multi-UAV cooperation.
C. Sample-Efﬁcient Reinforcement Learning
For reinforcement learning, the experience replay method
is commonly utilized to enhance the efﬁciency of experience
usage [34]. Agents can learn more effectively from speciﬁc
experiences [35]. The prioritized experience replay method
employs a biased importance sampling instead of a uniform
sampling. Speciﬁcally, a temporal difference error is used to
estimatetheimportanceofanexperience,andthismethodisvali-
dated through experiments conducted with the Deep Q-Network
(DQN) algorithm in the Atari environment. Furthermore, Prior-
itized Sequence Experience Replay (PSER) [36] involves infor-
mation from state transitions when estimating the importance
of a temporal difference error. Emphasizing Recent Experience
(ERE) [36] gives higher weights to recent experiences and shows
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Texas at Arlington. Downloaded on June 27,2026 at 06:13:32 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

CHEN et al.: ROBUST MARL METHOD BASED ON ADVERSARIAL DOMAIN RANDOMIZATION FOR REAL-WORLD DUAL-UAV COOPERATION
1617
better performance in continuous action space. Likelihood-Free
Importance Weighting (LFIW) [37] uses the likelihood ratio
method to estimate the importance of an experience.
It is worth noting that these methods attempt to enhance
the algorithm performance in general environments but can not
directly be applied to a reinforcement learning training in an
environment with domain randomization parameters.
III. PRELIMINARIES
A. Markov Games
A Markov game [38] extends a Markov decision process to
multi-agents and can be represented by the tuple:
G := ⟨N, S, {Ai}i∈N , {Oi}i∈N , {Ri}i∈N , T, γ⟩
where N is a ﬁnite set of N agents, S is the set of states and
s ∈S represents a state. Each agent i has its own action set Ai
and observation set Oi. Let ai ∈Ai and oi ∈Oi. The reward
function for agent i is deﬁned as ri : S × A1 × . . . AN →Ri,
where Ri represents the set of possible rewards for agent i.
The state transition function T : S × A1 × . . . AN →S is de-
termined by the current state and the actions taken by all agents.
γ ∈[0, 1] is a discount factor.
For each agent i in a Markov game, its optimal Bellman
equation can be expressed as:
V i
∗(s) = max
πi(·|s)

a∈A
N

j=1
πj(aj|s)

ri(s, a)
+ γ

s′∈S
P(s′|s, a)V i
∗(s′)

(1)
According to [39], one or multiple Nash equilibrium solutions
exist in a Markov game.
B. Nonstationary Markov Games
In our previous work [40], a variant of the partially observ-
able Markov game, namely a nonstationary Markov game, is
proposed to describe real-world situations better, i.e.,
G := ⟨N, S, {Ai}i∈N , {Oi}i∈N , {Ri}i∈N , T, U, γ⟩
where U is a set of domain randomization parameters that
parameterizes the randomization environment based on prior
knowledge. It should be noted that in G, the state transition func-
tion and reward function of each agent depends on the current
state s, the joint action of all agents a = (a1, a2, . . . , aN), and a
randomization parameter u ∈U. Speciﬁcally, the state transition
function can be represented as T : S × A1 × . . . AN × U →
S, and the reward function of agent i is represented as ri :
S × A1 × . . . AN × U →Ri.
C. Recurrent Multi-Agent Deep Deterministic Policy Gradient
Recurrent multi-agent deep deterministic policy gradient (R-
MADDPG) [41] is an extension of the multi-agent deep de-
terministic policy gradient (MADDPG) [42] by improving the
actor-network and critic-network of MADDPG. It is superior in
addressing the challenges posed by partially observable envi-
ronments and limited communications.
In R-MADDPG, each agent i maintains a reply buffer Di
that stores a batch of experience tuples in view of the form
(oi,t, ai,t, o′
i,t+1, ri,t, cp
i,t, cp
i,t+1, cq
i,t, cq
i,t+1), where oi denotes
the observation of agent i, ai is the action taken by agent i
based on oi, ri is the corresponding reward, and cp and cq
refer to the cell state of the actor and critic networks before and
after the selected action, respectively. Furthermore, each agent
has a continuous policy π = πθi, a target policy π′ = π′
θ′
i, and
a centralized action-value function Q = Qπ
i . The placeholders
x ∼U(Di) and a ∼U(Di) are used to represent the obser-
vation and action information of all agents from the sampled
experiences. Then, the policy gradient is calculated as follows:
∇θiJ(π) = EU(Di)[∇θiπ(ai,t|oi,t, cp
i,t)
·∇ai,tQπ
i (x, a, cq
t)|ai,t=πi(oi,t,cp
i,t)]
(2)
The action-value function Qπ
i is updated based on
L(θi) = EU(Di)[(ri + γQπ′
i (x′, a′
j, cq
t+1)|a′
j=π′
j(oj,cp
j )
−Qπ
i (x, a, cq
t))2]
(3)
It is shown in [43] and [44] that R-MADDPG performs well for
the following types of tasks: tasks with continuous action spaces,
tasks involving temporal relationships, and tasks that need to in-
fer the parameter distributions of domain randomization. Based
on our previous experiments and analysis [40], we also ﬁnd that
R-MADDPGsuitsourdual-UAVcooperativetransportationtask
that will be introduced in Section V-A.
IV. THEORY AND METHODOLOGY
In this section, we conduct a theoretical analysis of the feasi-
bility of the proposed methods. Subsequently, we provide a de-
tailed overview of our proposed methods, including adversarial
domain randomization (ADR), prioritized experience replay for
domain randomization experiences, and distributed hierarchical
sim2real transfer.
A. Theoretical Foundations
In a nonstationary Markov game model, we deﬁne the value
function of agent i as vi
π, and then the Bellman equation of vi
π
can be expressed as follows:
vi
π(s) =

a∈A
N

j=1
πj(aj|s)

ri(s, a, u)
+ γ

s′∈S
P(s′|s, a, u)vi
π(s′)

(4)
where s represents the current state, a represents the joint action
of all agents except agent j and s′ represents the next state
reached after agents take the action (aj, a) in the state s, where
(aj, a) represents the joint action of all agents including agent
j. And the detailed derivation of the value function vi
π(s) can
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Texas at Arlington. Downloaded on June 27,2026 at 06:13:32 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

1618
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT VEHICLES, VOL. 9, NO. 1, JANUARY 2024
be found in Appendix A. Clearly, the optimal Bellman equation
can be formulated as follows:
V i
∗(s) = max
πi(·|s)

a∈A
N

j=1
πj(aj|s)

ri(s, a, u)
+ γ

s′∈S
P(s′|s, a, u)V i
∗(s′)

(5)
Based on the deﬁnition of nonstationary Markov game, the inﬂu-
ence of u ∈U on reward ri and the state transition probability P
are both deterministic. Therefore, ri
s and Ps belong to compact
setsforalls ∈S andi ∈N.AccordingtoProposition2.2in[45]
regarding the existence of Nash equilibrium in a robust Markov
game with rewards and state transition perturbations, we can
draw the following conclusion:
Property 1: Suppose that state space S, domain randomiza-
tion space U, and action space A are ﬁnite in a nonstationary
MarkovgameG.Then,atleastonenonstationaryMarkovperfect
Nash equilibrium exists in G.
Speciﬁcally, for any state s ∈S and agent i ∈N, there exists
a set of value functions V∗= (V 1
∗, V 2
∗, . . . , V N
∗) such that for
each V i
∗:
πi
∗(·|s) ∈arg max
πi(·|s)

a∈A
πi(ai|s)

j̸=i
πj
∗(aj|s)

ri(s, a, u)
+ γ

s′∈S
P(s′|s, a, u)V i
∗(s′)

(6)
We refer to this joint policy π∗= (π1
∗, π2
∗, . . . , πN
∗) as the per-
fect Nash equilibrium of G.
As mentioned in Section II-B, uniformly selecting the pa-
rameter u during a training process is insufﬁcient to achieve
a high-performance and stable policy that ﬁts various environ-
mental situations. To address this issue, an agent should seek
to maximize the expected reward under the worst-case situation
resulting from the randomization parameters u such that a more
stable policy can be trained (i.e., it can adapt better to various
situations). The Bellman-type Equation can be represented in
the following form:
V
i
∗(s) = max
πi(·|s) min
u∈U

a∈A
N

j=1
πj(aj|s)

ri(s, a, u)
+ γ

s′∈S
P(s′|s, a, u)V
i
∗(s′)

(7)
According to the fact that the inner loop can be minimized
by a deterministic choice of u from randomization space U,
we can optimize a policy μ : S →U to minimize the inner
loop. This policy is named “nature player” for generating the
randomization parameter u. We denote
T i(s, a, u) = ri(s, a, u) + γ

s′∈S
P(s′|s, a, u)V
i
∗(s′)
(8)
Then, (7) can be rewritten as follows:
V
i
∗(s)
= max
πi(·|s) min
μ(·|s)

a∈A
N

j=1
πj(aj|s)

ri(s, a, u)
+ γ

s′∈S
P(s′|s, a, u)V
i
∗(s′)

= max
πi(·|s) min
μ(·|s)

a∈A
N

j=1
πj(aj|s)T i(s, a, u)
= max
πi(·|s) min
μ(·|s) Eu∼μ(·|s),ai∼πi(·|s),a−i∼π−i(·|s)T i(s, a, u)
(9)
For convenience, a nonstationary Markov game with the nature
player is called as an adversarial stationary Markov game that
can be characterized by the following tuple:
G := ⟨N, S, {Ai}i∈N , {Oi}i∈N , Oμ, {Ri}i∈N , U, T, γ⟩
where oμ ∈Oμ denotes the observation of nature player μ and U
denotes the bounded space of domain randomization parameters
(i.e., the action space of μ). Notice that the nature player μ does
not exist in a nonstationary Markov game.
From (9), we can see that the form of the value function of an
adversarial stationary Markov game is consistent with the form
of the value function of a Markov game. Therefore, the Nash
equilibrium of an adversarial stationary Markov game exists
since the Nash equilibrium of any Markov game exists [39].
Therefore, we have the following conclusion:
Property 2: Suppose that state space S, domain randomiza-
tion space U, and action space A are ﬁnite in an adversarial
stationary Markov game G. Then, at least one perfect Nash
equilibrium exists in G.
Speciﬁcally, in an adversarial stationary Markov game, ∀s ∈
S and ∀i ∈N, there exists a set of value functions V ∗=
(V
1
∗, V
2
∗, . . . , V
N
∗) such that for each V
i
∗:

μ∗(·|s), πi
∗(·|s)

∈arg max
πi(·|s)
min
μ(·|s)

u∈U
μ(u|s)

a∈A
πi(ai|s)

j̸=i
πj
∗(aj|s)T i(s, a, u)
(10)
The joint policy (μ∗, π∗) = (μ∗, π1
∗, π2
∗, . . . , πN
∗) with the na-
ture player is the perfect Nash equilibrium of this adversarial
stationary Markov game.
B. MARL With Adversarial Nature Player
Fig. 1 illustrates the overall framework of training a control
policy based on MARL and ADR. The training process of multi-
agent policies is displayed in the left part. The agents interact
withtheirenvironmenttoobtainthecurrentstates,generatejoint
action a that affects the environment, and optimize their policies
by computing rewards. For a partially observable environment,
the paradigm of centralized training and decentralized execution
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Texas at Arlington. Downloaded on June 27,2026 at 06:13:32 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

CHEN et al.: ROBUST MARL METHOD BASED ON ADVERSARIAL DOMAIN RANDOMIZATION FOR REAL-WORLD DUAL-UAV COOPERATION
1619
Fig. 1.
Framework for training MARL with adversarial nature player.
is used. For a domain randomization environment, a long short-
term memory (LSTM) network structure is employed to infer
the distribution of the domain randomization parameter u and
action sequences. According to (2) and (3), the policy gradient
of R-MADDPG with domain randomization is:
∇θiJ(π) = EU(Di)[∇θiπ(ai,t|oi,t, cp
i,t)
·∇ai,tQπ
i (x, a, u, cq
t)|ai,t=πi(oi,t,cp
i,t)]
(11)
The action-value function Qπ
i is updated based on:
L(θi) = EU(Di)[(ri + γQπ′
i (x′, a′
j, u′, cq
t+1)|a′
j=π′
j(oj,cp
j )
−Qπ
i (x, a, u, cq
t))2]
(12)
Ontheright-handsideofFig.1,thetrainingprocessofanature
player policy, named Adversarial Environment Generator, is
displayed. It generates domain randomization parameters for the
ADR environment. The nature player obtains the current domain
randomization parameter observation oμ from the current state
s and generates the domain randomization parameter u for the
next training step via an encoder-decoder network structure with
parameter δ. The goal of updating δ is to minimize the loss value
according to our loss function
loss = α0 × r + β0 × kl −ω0 × mse
(13)
wherer denotestheaveragerewardobtainedbyagentsexecuting
actions in the domain randomization environment generated by
the parameter oμ. kl denotes the Kullback-Leibler divergence
which measures the difference between the latent distribution of
the output randomization parameter u and the normal distribu-
tion of u. mse is the mean squared error, measuring the mean
squared difference between observed oμ and generated u and
ensuring the randomness of u. α0, β0 and ω0 are the scaling
factors, and α0, β0, ω0 ∈[0, 1].
Algorithm 1: MARL with Adversarial Nature Player.
Initialize: Qσ: Critic network, πθi: Actor network for
agent i, Q′
σ′: Target Critic network, π′
θ′
i: Target Actor
network for agent i, μδ: Nature player’s network, Di:
Replay buffer for agent i, Z: Number of iterations;
Reset the environment;
for t = 1 →Z do
Initialize Random process ϵ for action exploration;
Generate randomization parameter u = μ(oμ);
Update the environment based on u;
for i = 1 →N do
Obtain cp and cq;
Select action ai = πi(oi) + ϵ;
Obtain cp′ and cq′;
end for
Execute joint action a = (a1, a2, . . . , aN);
Obtain reward r and new observation o′;
Calculate Nature player’s loss based on (13);
Update Nature player’s network μδ based on loss;
for i = 1 →N do
Store (oi, ai, r, o′
i, u, cp, cq, cp′, cq′) in Di;
Sample a batch from Di based on Algorithm 2;
Update Qσ, πθi, Q′
σ′, π′
θ′
i based on Eqs. (11) and (12);
end for
end for
As α0 approaches 1, the nature player places greater emphasis
on generating parameters for the ADR environment. As it ap-
proaches 0, the nature player is used to generate parameters for
generalrandomizationenvironments.Inpracticalexperiments,it
is impossible to achieve inﬁnite training steps. To ensure a good
performance of the trained policy in a limited number of training
steps, it is essential to train a policy in an ADR environment and
to ensure that the distribution of randomization parameters has
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Texas at Arlington. Downloaded on June 27,2026 at 06:13:32 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

1620
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT VEHICLES, VOL. 9, NO. 1, JANUARY 2024
a randomness and approaches a normal distribution that ﬁts the
real world. Algorithm 1 illustrates MARL with an adversarial
nature player.
C. Prioritized Experience Replay for Domain Randomization
Experiences
During our experiments, we observe that training a reinforce-
ment learning model in a domain randomization environment
often suffers from a slow convergence speed due to the general-
ization of experiences caused by various domain randomization
parameters. To improve the convergence efﬁciency of a training,
we propose a prioritized experience replay method suitable for
domain randomization experiences (PERDRE for short).
We adopt the critic loss to measure the inﬂuence of each
experience on updating the network. Besides, experiences with
K-dimensional domain randomization parameters are divided
into K subsets based on the sum of normalized domain random-
ization parameters. Also, we create a list that records the times
each subset has been sampled in the past training iterations.
This list contains K rows of tuples (Subset, Counts). Then,
the probability of an experience being sampled is calculated
according to the following formula:
P =

Rank(Iw)
M
e Rank(Iw)
αs
+ βs
(14)
Iw = Rank(L) + Rank′(C)
(15)
Here, for an experience e out of M experiences, Rank(L)
represents its ranking based on the critic loss, while Rank′(C)
represents the reverse ranking of the number of times that the
corresponding subset E of e has been replayed. The impor-
tance weight Iw is calculated for the experience based on these
rankings and is then used to compute its sampling probability.
Hyperparameters αs and βs are used to balance the inﬂuence of
importance weights and random sampling. PERDRE is realized
in Algorithm 2.
D. Time Complexity of Algorithms
Let the size of Batchupdate be d. Then the time complexity
of Algorithm 2 is O(d). We assume that the time complexity
of an agent selecting an action and the nature player generating
randomization parameters is D1, the overall complexity of all
agents interacting with the environment and resetting the en-
vironment is D2, the complexity of calculating the loss value
of the nature player and updating its network is D3, and the
complexity of updating the critic, target critic, actor, and target
actor networks for an agent is D4. The total time complexity of
Algorithm 1 (when N agents execute Z iterations) is:
O (Z (D1 + D2 + D3 + N(D1 + d + D4)))
(16)
E. Distributed Hierarchical Transfer
A control system can be hierarchically and distributively
deployed onto the onboard computer of a UAV, as illustrated
in Fig. 2, and this method ensures the ﬂexibility of a system.
Fig. 2.
Distributed hierarchical Sim2Real transfer.
Algorithm 2: PERDRE.
Initialize: Batchupdate: a batch of experiences to update
the networks, M: the number of random sampling size,
K_list: a list storing subset types and their replay
counts;
while Batchupdate is not full do
Randomly sample M experiences from replay buffer
Di;
for e = 0 →M do
Determine the subset E the experience e belongs to;
Get the replay count C for E based on K_list;
Calculate the critic loss L of the experience e;
Calculate P for each experience e based on (14);
Generate a random number rd within [0,1];
if rd < P then
Insert experience e into the Batchupdate;
Update the C for E;
end if
if Batchupdate is full then
break;
end if
end for
end while
The software programs and hardware devices can be ho-
mogeneously and distributively deployed on multiple UAVs,
requiring only simple conﬁgurations to enable any two of them
to cooperate on the task.
Furthermore, the software program can be divided into three
layers: (1) Data Perception, (2) Action Decision, and (3) Low-
level Control. The last layer is responsible for executing complex
ﬂight actions of UAV and obtaining video streams and sensor
data. The 1st layer performs the target recognition on video
stream data and processes GPS and other information. The 2nd
layer makes top-level decisions of a UAV based on the data
output by the data perception layer. To apply the intelligent
policytrainedinasimulationenvironmenttoareal-worldcontrol
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Texas at Arlington. Downloaded on June 27,2026 at 06:13:32 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

CHEN et al.: ROBUST MARL METHOD BASED ON ADVERSARIAL DOMAIN RANDOMIZATION FOR REAL-WORLD DUAL-UAV COOPERATION
1621
Fig. 3.
Diagram of dual-UAV cooperation transportation.
system of UAVs, a target detection module and a GPS data
processing program trained with real-world environment data
should be used to replace the target detection module trained
with simulation data and unreal engine global coordinate lo-
cation information in the 1st layer. At the 2nd layer, the ADR
method is used when training a policy in a simulation envi-
ronment to improve the transferability of the policy. Thus, the
trained MARL policy can be easily transferred to the real-world
control system without additional modiﬁcations.
V. EXPERIMENTS
A. Test Tasks
We use the following two environments to show the advan-
tages of our method.
1) LunarLander-V2: In this environment [46], the task ob-
jective is to land a lunar lander by controlling its main engine
and thrusters. The goal is to achieve a smooth landing, and ad-
ditional rewards are given for landing precisely on a designated
landing platform. Negative rewards are assigned for crashing
the lander. The rewards are inﬂuenced by factors such as fuel
consumption and landing velocity. In this task, there is a primary
randomization factor, which is the variation of the main engine
strength (MES).
2) Dual-UAV Cooperative Transportation: The dual-UAV
cooperative task in this article is deﬁned in our previous
work [40], [47], [48]. As shown in Fig. 3, two UAVs work
together to transport a payload, where the payload is secured
by a rope. The UAVs are required to identify the target lo-
cation, and then carry and release the payload to the target
while ensuring the safety of the payload and maintaining a safe
distance from each other. In order to accomplish this task, a
transferable collaborative decision-making policy is required.
In our previous work [40], we deploy a simulation environment
using the AirSim simulator in Unreal Engine. We deﬁne agents,
agent observations, rewards, and actions in the environment,
as shown in Appendix B. In addition, as shown in Table I, six
domain randomization parameters and their ranges are deﬁned
TABLE I
DOMAIN RANDOMIZATION PARAMETERS AND RANGES
Fig. 4.
Comparison of Mean Reward for three policies trained by ADRDQN
(ours), UDRDQN, and DQN methods in the LunarLander-v2 environment
considering various MES.
based on prior knowledge. We conduct experiments in this en-
vironment to evaluate the effectiveness of the proposed method.
The hyperparameter settings can be found in Appendix C.
B. Performance Analysis of Different Policies
1) LunarLander-V2: Policies trained by the following three
methods are evaluated in this environment with varied MES
values.
r ADRDQN (ours): the method that trains a policy in an
adversarial domain randomization environment generated
by a natural player.
r UDRDQN: the method that trains a policy in a domain
randomization environment generated by the traditional
domain randomization method.
r DQN: the baseline method that trains a policy in a ﬁxed
environment without any randomization.
In the LunarLander-v2 environment, the MES is viewed as a
critical domain randomization parameter. We set its range to be
[8, 13]. Intuitively, a smaller MES implies a more challenging
task. We conduct experiments to test the performance of the
policies trained by ADRDQN, UDRDQN, and DQN methods
when MES varies arithmetically. The experimental results are
shown in Fig. 4, indicating that the mean reward exceeding 200
signiﬁes successful task completion.
When MES is 12 or 13, all three policies successfully com-
plete the task. However, as MES is decreased, the policy trained
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Texas at Arlington. Downloaded on June 27,2026 at 06:13:32 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

1622
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT VEHICLES, VOL. 9, NO. 1, JANUARY 2024
Fig. 5.
Comparison of completion rates for dual-UAV transportation among three policies by ADRMA (ours), UDRMA, and R-MADDPG methods.
(a) Performance comparison across varying noise of GPS position. (b) Performance comparison in domain randomization environment.
by DQN fails to adapt to the increasingly-challenging environ-
ment. the policy trained by UDRDQN is still able to complete
the task at the medium MES but struggles in environments with
smaller MES. Ontheother hand, thepolicytrainedbyADRDQN
shows stable performance in challenging environments while
also effectively adapting to normal environments. This exper-
iment conﬁrms the advantages of our method over traditional
methods in training policies to adapt to these challenging situa-
tions.
2) Dual-UAV Cooperative Transportation: Policies trained
by the following three methods are evaluated in the dual-UAV
cooperative transportation environments.
r ADRMA (ours): the method that trains a policy in an
adversarial domain randomization environment generated
by a natural player.
r UDRMA: the method that trains a policy in a domain
randomization environment generated by the traditional
domain randomization method.
r R-MADDPG: the baseline method that trains a policy in a
ﬁxed environment without any randomization.
Firstly, weconduct tests inanenvironment whereonlyasingle
domain randomization parameter is changed. Additionally, we
evaluate the performance of the policies in environments where
all domain randomization parameters are uniformly selected
within predeﬁned ranges.
a) Impact of Varying a Single Domain Randomization Param-
eter: While keeping other randomization parameters unchanged,
we produce seven different degrees of noise on GPS position
parameters in the predeﬁned range with equal intervals to gener-
ate environments and conduct experiments in each environment
for each trained policy to execute 200 episodes. The results are
shown in Fig. 5(a). This can serve as an example for analyzing
the speciﬁc performance of policies trained by the ADRMA,
UDRMA, and R-MADDPG methods in domain randomization
environments with varying degrees of randomization parame-
ters.
We ﬁnd that in low-noise situations, the three policies all
perform well. As the noise increases, the baseline policy trained
by R-MADDPG cannot adapt to a great noise. In comparison,
the policy trained by UDRMA can maintain a task completion
rate of around 65% in moderate noise situations. However, as
noise increases further and the situation becomes more challeng-
ing for completing tasks, it struggles to perform well in these
challenging situations. On the other hand, the policy trained by
ADRMA demonstrates stable performance to different degrees
of noise, with a task success rate of over 75% in all situations.
During a training, ADRMA utilizes an adversarial environ-
ment generated by the nature player, while this environment
tends to be more complex. As a result, under the same con-
ditions of other factors (e.g., training iterations are the same),
the policies trained by our method can better adapt to these
challenging situations compared with those policies trained in an
environment generated without the nature player. Additionally,
Mehta et al. [31] also shows that different values of domain
randomization parameters lead to different effects on a policy’s
performance in an evaluated environment. When a policy adapts
better to these challenging situations, it has better stability and
robustness. Obviously, with the increasing of noise of GPS
position in our application, the policy trained by our ADRMA
shows a more stable and robust performance.
In environments generated by high-dimensional domain ran-
domization parameters, it is difﬁcult to intuitively deﬁne which
environments are more challenging. We believe that the qualita-
tive analysis of the performance of policies trained by ADRMA,
UDRMA, and R-MADDPG methods in situations with domain
randomization parameters along a single dimension can be
generalized to high-dimensional.
b) Performance in Domain Randomization Environment:
Each policy is trained for 20000 episodes, and during each
training, a policy is evaluated every 250 episodes by testing
its completion rate in a fully uniform domain randomization
environment. The results are shown in Fig. 5(b). After multiple
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Texas at Arlington. Downloaded on June 27,2026 at 06:13:32 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

CHEN et al.: ROBUST MARL METHOD BASED ON ADVERSARIAL DOMAIN RANDOMIZATION FOR REAL-WORLD DUAL-UAV COOPERATION
1623
TABLE II
PERFORMANCE IN DOMAIN RANDOMIZATION ENVIRONMENT
TABLE III
COMPARISON UNDER DIFFERENT HYPERPARAMETERS
iterations, the policy trained by ADRMA can adapt well to
different situations and is relatively stable, with a test success
rate of about 80%. The policy trained by UDRMA has a test
success rate of about 73% but with higher variability. The base-
line policy trained by R-MADDPG initially performs relatively
well but eventually struggles to adapt to domain randomization
environments and maintains a success rate of only about 45%
with high variability.
Further, we test the trained policies in a fully uniform domain
randomization environment for 2000 episodes, and the results
are shown in Table II. Among the 2000 episodes of testing,
the baseline policy trained by R-MADDPG completes the task
in less than half of the episodes. But the policies trained by
ADRMA and UDRMA perform better and the former has a
higher probability of completing the task obviously. It is also
found that both policies trained by ADRMA and UDRMA have
an improvement in completion timesteps. Therefore, it is evident
that our method has advantages.
c) Hyperparameter Analysis: In this section, we discuss the
design of hyperparameters in (13). We perform experimental
validations using three typical value settings, and the results are
presented in Table III.
In the ﬁrst case, the nature player is biased towards gener-
ating adversarial environments, and the trained policy achieves
optimal performance under this parameter setting, which is used
as the ﬁnal conﬁguration. In contrast, the policy trained in the
second case, where the nature player generates environments
according to a normal distribution, exhibits poor performance.
In the third case, where the nature player generates environments
with random variations, the performance of the trained policy is
comparable to that achieved by traditional domain randomiza-
tion methods.
C. EFFECTIVENESS OF PERDRE
We compare the training rewards for our PERDRE and the
traditional random experience replay (RER). As shown in Fig. 6,
in the 20000 training episodes, the rewards obtained in the
domain randomization environment by the policy trained by the
Fig. 6.
Training reward curves of PERDRE and RER.
TABLE IV
PERFORMANCE IN DOMAIN RANDOMIZATION ENVIRONMENT
RER method start to converge after 10000 episodes, On the other
hand, when using the PERDRE method, the rewards start to con-
verge after around 6000 episodes. It can be observed that using
PERDRE for experience replay in the domain randomization
environments can increase the convergence speed of training
the agent’s policy without decreasing the policy performance.
Due to the time cost of serial interaction with the virtual engine
environment, 20000 episodes of training take approximately
45 hours. Therefore, improving the convergence speed of the
rewards obtained by the training policy is valuable.
D. SIM2REAL TRANSFER EXPERIMENT
We successfully transfer the trained policy to the control
system of our dual-UAV transportation task and conduct 5 ﬂight
trials for each of the four types of initial states, as shown in
Fig. 7. The task completion rates and completion time are shown
in Table IV. It is evident that policy R-MADDPG, which is
not trained in domain randomization environments, struggles to
adapt to real-world situations. In Cases I and II, the ADRMA
policy trained with adversarial nature player and the UDRMA
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Texas at Arlington. Downloaded on June 27,2026 at 06:13:32 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

1624
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT VEHICLES, VOL. 9, NO. 1, JANUARY 2024
Fig. 7.
Classiﬁcation of experiments in real-world environments. (a) Case I: Parallel. (b) Case II: Tilt. (c) Case III: Vertical. (b) Case IV: Displacement.
policy trained with traditional domain randomization method
both perform well. However, in Cases III and IV, ADRMA
exhibits more stable performance compared to UDRMA, but
completing the task in these cases often requires more time.
Some videos about our dual-UAV transportation system can
be found at https://ﬂml.tongji.edu.cn/TOOL.htm (please click
the ﬁles: Co-Transportation System of Two UAVs v2-1 and Co-
Transportation System of Two UAVs v2-2).
VI. CONCLUSION
In this article, we make several meaningful contributions to
the ﬁeld of sim2real technology for MARL. Firstly, we introduce
the adversarial domain randomization method. Deﬁne MARL
with adversarial domain randomization as an adversarial sta-
tionary Markov game, and provide a theoretical analysis of its
solvability. Secondly, we propose the PERDRE algorithm to en-
hance the convergence speed of rewards during a policy training
in a domain randomization environment, which improves the
training efﬁciency.
Moreover, we apply the adversarial domain randomization
method and PERDRE algorithm to our dual-UAV cooperative
transportation task and demonstrate their effectiveness in im-
proving the performance of the trained MARL policy in complex
situations. Our methods can achieve a more stable performance
than the traditional domain randomization method. In addition,
we do experiments in the open environment of LunarLander-v2
and obtain a better result, demonstrating its scalability in other
tasks.
Sim2real technology for MARL is a valuable study ﬁeld. In
futurework,weplantocombinetheADRandPERDREmethods
proposed in this article with different reinforcement learning
algorithms to complete more practical tasks. Additionally, we
aim to explore more valuable improvements in the domain ran-
domization method. We hope that this article can inspire further
study into sim2real technology for reinforcement learning.
APPENDIX A
DERIVATION OF BELLMAN EQUATION FOR VALUE FUNCTION IN
NONSTATIONARY MARKOV GAMES
In a nonstationary Markov games, the probability of s′ ∈S
and ri ∈Ri occurring at time t for a particular agent i can be
expressed as follows:
pi(s′, ri|s, a, u)
=Pr
⎧
⎨
⎩St = s′, Ri
t =ri|St−1 = s,
N

j=1
Aj
t−1 =a, Ut−1 = u
⎫
⎬
⎭
(17)
According to (17), the state transition probability can be ex-
pressed as the following function:
P : S × S ×
N

j=1
Aj × U →[0, 1]
(18)
i.e.
P(s′|s, a, u)
= Pr
⎧
⎨
⎩St = s′|St−1 = s,
N

j=1
Aj
t−1 = a, Ut−1 = u
⎫
⎬
⎭
=

r∈Ri
pi(s′, ri|s, a, u)
(19)
Similarly, the expected reward can be deﬁned by State-Action-
Randomization as follows:
ri : S ×
N

j=1
Aj × U →R
(20)
i.e.
ri(s, a, u)
= E
⎧
⎨
⎩Ri
t|St−1 = s,
N

j=1
Aj
t−1 = a, Ut−1 = u
⎫
⎬
⎭
=

ri∈Ri
ri 
s′∈S
pi(s′, ri|s, a, u)
(21)
Based on the basic property that the value function satisﬁes re-
cursion, we can construct the recursive formula for the expected
return: Gi
t = Ri
t+1 + γGi
t+1. For any policy πi of agent i and
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Texas at Arlington. Downloaded on June 27,2026 at 06:13:32 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

CHEN et al.: ROBUST MARL METHOD BASED ON ADVERSARIAL DOMAIN RANDOMIZATION FOR REAL-WORLD DUAL-UAV COOPERATION
1625
any state s, there exists a relationship between the value of state
s and the values of its possible successor states, which can be
expressed as follows:
vi
π(s) = Eπ[Gt|St = s]
= Eπ[Ri
t+1 + γGi
t+1|St = s]
=

a∈A
N

j=1
πj(aj|s)

s′∈S

ri∈Ri
pi(s′, ri|s, a, u)

ri + γE[Gi
t+1|St = s]

=

a∈A
N

j=1
πj(aj|s)

s′∈S

ri∈Ri
pi(s′, ri|s, a, u)

ri + γvi
π(s′)

(22)
The Bellman equation for the value function in a nonstationary
Markovgamecanbefurtherexpressedaccordingto(19)and(21)
as follows:
vi
π(s) =

a∈A
N

j=1
πj(aj|s)

ri(s, a, u)
+ γ

s′∈S
P(s′|s, a, u)vi
π(s′)

(23)
APPENDIX B
ENVIRONMENT
The Markov game model in our application is constructed as
follows:
1) Agent: Each UAV is considered as an agent, and the total
number of agents is N = 2.
2) Observation: Each agent’s observation includes the fol-
lowing two parts:
•(dx, dy): The relative positional coordinates of another
agent with respect to itself.
•(px1, py1, px2, py2):Thepositioncoordinatesofthetop-
left and bottom-right corners of the target objects in the
video stream. There are four sets of such coordinates
for the two target objects detected by the forward and
downward-facing cameras.
3) Action: The two-dimensional linear velocity and yaw rate
of a UAV in the horizontal plane (vx, vy, yaw).
4) Reward: The agents share a team reward, and the reward
function is deﬁned as:
R = αrrd + βrcost + ωrrcom
(24)
where αr, βr and ωr are the scaling parameters.
rt
d =

i
dt−1
i
−dt
i
(25)
where dt
i represents the distance from UAV i to the nearest
target object at time t.
costt =

−|dt−1
c
−dt
c|,
if not terminated
pun(dt
c, speed),
otherwise
(26)
TABLE V
EXPERIMENTAL PARAMETER
For the following two cases: the distance between the two
UAVs is not in the safe distance range or the execution
step of an episode exceeds T steps, they are considered
infeasible solutions, and then a signiﬁcant negative reward
isassigned. dt
c representstherelativedistancebetweentwo
drones at time t. The speed of UAVs is deﬁned as:
speed =

i

v2xi + v2yi
(27)
rt
com =

T −t,
if completed
0,
otherwise
(28)
where T is the maximum episode length and we set T =
30(step) in our experiments.
APPENDIX C
EXPERIMENTAL PARAMETER SETTINGS
Table V lists the hyperparameters and their values used in our
dual-UAV cooperative transportation.
REFERENCES
[1] Z. Zhang, X. Peng, and A. Zhang, “Trajectory tracking control for
quadrotor slung load system with unknown load’s linear velocity and
cable length,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Veh., early access, Apr. 25, 2023,
doi: 10.1109/TIV.2023.3270165.
[2] Y. Wang, G. Yu, W. Xie, W. Zhang, and C. Silvestre, “Cooperative
path following control of a team of quadrotor-slung-load systems under
disturbances,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Veh., early access, May 09, 2023,
doi: 10.1109/TIV.2023.3274671.
[3] Y. Zhao, F. Lin, and G. Guo, “Composite anti-disturbance dynamic posi-
tioning for mass-switched unmanned marine vehicles,” IEEE Trans. Intell.
Veh., early access, May 23, 2023, doi: 10.1109/TIV.2023.3279296.
[4] J. Zhang et al., “PSO-based sparse source location in large-scale environ-
ments with a UAV swarm,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 24, no. 5,
pp. 5249–5258, May 2023.
[5] H. Li, Y. Wu, and M. Chen, “Adaptive fault-tolerant tracking control for
discrete-time multiagent systems via reinforcement learning algorithm,”
IEEE Trans. Cybern., vol. 51, no. 3, pp. 1163–1174, Mar. 2021.
[6] C. Wang, J. Wang, Y. Shen, and X. Zhang, “Autonomous navigation of
UAVsinlarge-scalecomplexenvironments:Adeepreinforcementlearning
approach,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 68, no. 3, pp. 2124–2136,
Mar. 2019.
[7] C. Wu et al., “UAV autonomous target search based on deep rein-
forcement learning in complex disaster scene,” IEEE Access, vol. 7,
pp. 117227–117245, 2019.
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Texas at Arlington. Downloaded on June 27,2026 at 06:13:32 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

1626
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT VEHICLES, VOL. 9, NO. 1, JANUARY 2024
[8] Y.-J. Chen, D.-K. Chang, and C. Zhang, “Autonomous tracking using
a swarm of UAVs: A constrained multi-agent reinforcement learning
approach,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 69, no. 11, pp. 13702–13717,
Nov. 2020.
[9] Z. Mou, Y. Zhang, F. Gao, H. Wang, T. Zhang, and Z. Han, “Deep
reinforcement learning based three-dimensional area coverage with uav
swarm,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 39, no. 10, pp. 3160–3176,
Oct. 2021.
[10] F. Wang, J. Huang, K. H. Low, and T. Hu, “Collective navigation of aerial
vehicle swarms: A ﬂocking inspired approach,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Veh.,
early access, May 01, 2023, doi: 10.1109/TIV.2023.3271667.
[11] W. Zhao, J. P. Queralta, and T. Westerlund, “Sim-to-real transfer in deep
reinforcement learning for robotics: A survey,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. Ser.
Comput. Intell., 2020, pp. 737–744.
[12] W. Zhu, X. Guo, D. Owaki, K. Kutsuzawa, and M. Hayashibe, “A survey
of sim-to-real transfer techniques applied to reinforcement learning for
bioinspired robots,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 34, no. 7,
pp. 3444–3459, Jul. 2023.
[13] J. Tobin, R. Fong, A. Ray, J. Schneider, W. Zaremba, and P. Abbeel, “Do-
main randomization for transferring deep neural networks from simulation
to the real world,” in Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst., 2017,
pp. 23–30.
[14] H. Liu, L. Yang, and H. Yang, “Cooperative optimal control of the fol-
lowing operation of high-speed trains,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst.,
vol. 23, no. 10, pp. 17744–17755, Oct. 2022.
[15] G. Skorobogatov, C. Barrado, and E. Salamí, “Multiple UAV systems: A
survey,” Unmanned Syst., vol. 8, no. 2, pp. 149–169, 2020.
[16] Z. Zhou, G. Liu, and Y. Tang, “Multi-agent reinforcement learn-
ing: Methods, applications, visionary prospects, and challenges,” 2023,
doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2305.10091.
[17] B. G. Maciel-Pearson, L. Marchegiani, S. Akcay, A. A. Abarghouei, J.
Garforth, and T. P. Breckon, “Online deep reinforcement learning for
autonomous UAV navigation and exploration of outdoor environments,”
2019, arXiv:1912.05684.
[18] D. Wang, T. Fan, T. Han, and J. Pan, “A two-stage reinforcement learning
approach for multi-UAV collision avoidance under imperfect sensing,”
IEEE Robot. Automat. Lett., vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 3098–3105, Apr. 2020.
[19] L. Wang, K. Wang, C. Pan, W. Xu, N. Aslam, and L. Hanzo, “Multi-agent
deep reinforcement learning-based trajectory planning for multi-UAV
assisted mobile edge computing,” IEEE Trans. Cogn. Commun. Netw.,
vol. 7, no. 1, pp. 73–84, Mar. 2021.
[20] Z. Zhou, G. Liu, and M. Zhou, “A robust mean-ﬁeld actor-critic re-
inforcement learning against adversarial perturbations on agent states,”
IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., early access, Jun. 05, 2023,
doi: 10.1109/TNNLS.2023.3278715.
[21] K. D. Julian and M. J. Kochenderfer, “Distributed wildﬁre surveillance
with autonomous aircraft using deep reinforcement learning,” J. Guid.,
Control, Dyn., vol. 42, no. 8, pp. 1768–1778, 2019.
[22] H. X. Pham, H. M. La, D. Feil-Seifer, and L. V. Nguyen, “Cooperative
and distributed reinforcement learning of drones for ﬁeld coverage,” 2018,
arXiv:1803.07250.
[23] O. Walker, F. Vanegas, F. Gonzalez, and S. Koenig, “Multi-UAV target-
ﬁnding in simulated indoor environments using deep reinforcement learn-
ing,” in Proc. IEEE Aerosp. Conf., 2020, pp. 1–9.
[24] M. Yang, G. Liu, Z. Zhou, and J. Wang, “Partially observable mean
ﬁeld multi-agent reinforcement learning based on graph attention net-
work for UAV swarms,” Drones, vol. 7, no. 7, 2023, Art. no. 476,
doi: 10.3390/drones7070476.
[25] Z. Zhou and G. Liu, “Robustness testing for multi-agent rein-
forcement learning: State perturbations on critical agents,” 2023,
doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2306.06136.
[26] H. Jo et al., “Multi-agent reinforcement learning-based UAS control for
logistics environments,” in Proc. Asia-Paciﬁc Int. Symp. Aerosp. Technol.,
2021, pp. 963–972.
[27] S. Jeon et al., “Multiagent reinforcement learning based on fusion-
multiactor-attention-critic for multiple-unmanned-aerial-vehicle naviga-
tion control,” Energies, vol. 15, no. 19, 2022, Art. no. 7426. [Online].
Available: https://www.mdpi.com/1996-1073/15/19/7426
[28] S. Han, K. Zhu, M. Zhou, and X. Liu, “Joint deployment optimization and
ﬂight trajectory planning for UAV assisted IoT data collection: A bilevel
optimization approach,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 23, no. 11,
pp. 21492–21504, Nov. 2022.
[29] O. M. Andrychowicz et al., “Learning dexterous in-hand manipulation,”
Int. J. Robot. Res., vol. 39, no. 1, pp. 3–20, 2020.
[30] E. Candela, L. Parada, L. Marques, T.-A. Georgescu, Y. Demiris, and P.
Angeloudis, “Transferring multi-agent reinforcement learning policies for
autonomous driving using sim-to-real,” in Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell.
Robots Syst., 2022, pp. 8814–8820.
[31] B. Mehta, M. Diaz, F. Golemo, C. J. Pal, and L. Paull, “Active domain
randomization,” in Proc. Conf. Robot Learn., 2020, pp. 1162–1176.
[32] S. C. Raparthy, B. Mehta, F. Golemo, and L. Paull, “Generating auto-
matic curricula via self-supervised active domain randomization,” 2020,
arXiv:2002.07911.
[33] F. Muratore, C. Eilers, M. Gienger, and J. Peters, “Data-efﬁcient domain
randomization with bayesian optimization,” IEEE Robot. Automat. Lett.,
vol. 6, no. 2, pp. 911–918, Apr. 2021.
[34] L.-J. Lin, “Self-improving reactive agents based on reinforcement
learning, planning and teaching,” Mach. Learn., vol. 8, pp. 293–321,
1992.
[35] T. Schaul, J. Quan, I. Antonoglou, and D. Silver, “Prioritized experience
replay,” 2016, doi: 10.48550/arXiv.1511.05952.
[36] M. Brittain, J. R. Bertram, X. Yang, and P. Wei, “Prioritized sequence
experience replay,” 2019, arXiv:1905.12726.
[37] S. Sinha, J. Song, A. Garg, and S. Ermon, “Experience replay with
likelihood-free importance weights,” in Proc. 4th Annu. Conf. Learn. Dyn.
Control, 2022, pp. 110–123.
[38] W. W. Cohen and H. Hirsh, “Markov games as a framework for multi-agent
reinforcement learning,” in Proc. Mach. Learn., 1994, pp. 157–163.
[39] A. M. Fink, “Equilibrium in a stochastic n-person game,” J. Sci. Hiroshima
Univ., Ser. AI (Math.), vol. 28, no. 1, pp. 89–93, 1964.
[40] H. Shi, G. Liu, K. Zhang, Z. Zhou, and J. Wang, “Marl sim2real
transfer: Merging physical reality with digital virtuality in metaverse,”
IEEE Trans. Syst., Man, Cybern.: Syst., vol. 53, no. 4, pp. 2107–2117,
Apr. 2023.
[41] R. E. Wang, M. Everett, and J. P. How, “R-MADDPG for partially observ-
able environments and limited communication,” 2020, arXiv:2002.06684.
[42] R. Lowe, Y. WU, A. Tamar, J. Harb, O. Pieter Abbeel, and I. Mor-
datch, “Multi-agent actor-critic for mixed cooperative-competitive en-
vironments,” in Proc. 31st Int. Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2017,
pp. 6382–6393.
[43] X. Wei, L. Yang, G. Cao, T. Lu, and B. Wang, “Recurrent maddpg for
object detection and assignment in combat tasks,” IEEE Access, vol. 8,
pp. 163334–163343, 2020.
[44] T. Ibrahim, “Guided domain randomization with meta reinforcement
learning,” Master Sci. Thesis, Tampere Univ., Tampere, Finland, 2022.
[Online]. Available: https://trepo.tuni.ﬁ/bitstream/handle/10024/142061/
IbrahimTarek.pdf?sequence=2
[45] K. Zhang, T. Sun, Y. Tao, S. Genc, S. Mallya, and T. Basar, “Robust
multi-agent reinforcement learning with model uncertainty,” in Proc. 34th
Int. Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2020, pp. 10571–10583.
[46] G. Brockman et al., “Openai gym,” 2016, arXiv:1606.01540.
[47] Q. L. Weng, G. J. Liu, P. Zhou, H. R. Shi, and K. W. Zhang, “Co-TS:
Design and implementation of a 2-UAV cooperative transportation sys-
tem,” Int. J. Micro Air Veh., vol. 15, 2023, Art. no. 17568293231158443,
doi: 10.1177/17568293231158443.
[48] P. Zhou, G. Liu, J. Wang, Q. Weng, K. Zhang, and Z. Zhou, “Lightweight
unmanned aerial vehicle video object detection based on spatial-temporal
correlation,” Int. J. Commun. Syst., vol. 35, no. 17, 2022, Art. no. e5334.
[Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1002/dac.5334
Shutong Chen received the B.S. degree in computer
science and technology from Sichuan University,
Chengdu, China, in 2021. She is currently working
toward the M.S. degree in computer science and
technology with Tongji University, Shanghai, China.
Her research interests include reinforcement learning
and intelligent control systems.
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Texas at Arlington. Downloaded on June 27,2026 at 06:13:32 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

CHEN et al.: ROBUST MARL METHOD BASED ON ADVERSARIAL DOMAIN RANDOMIZATION FOR REAL-WORLD DUAL-UAV COOPERATION
1627
Guanjun Liu (Senior Member, IEEE) received the
Ph.D. degree in computer software and theory from
Tongji University, Shanghai, China, in 2011. He was
a Postdoctoral Research Fellow with the Singapore
University of Technology and Design, Singapore,
from 2011 to 2013, and a Postdoctoral Research
Fellow with the Humboldt University of Berlin,
Berlin, Germany, from 2013 to 2014, supported by
the Alexander von Humboldt Foundation. He is cur-
rently a Professor with the Department of Computer
Science, Tongji University. He has authored or coau-
thored more than 150 papers and authored three books: Petri Nets: Theoretical
Models and Analysis Methods for Concurrent Systems (Springer, 2022), Primary
Unfolding of Petri Nets: A Model Checking Method for Concurrent Systems (in
Chinese, Science Press, 2020), and Liveness of Petri Nets and Its Application
(in Chinese, Tongji University Press, 2020). His research interests include Petri
net theory, model checking, machine learning, cyber-physical systems, and
multi-UAV cooperation. He was the Guest Editor of some journals including
the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMPUTATIONAL SOCIAL SYSTEMS, Mathematical
Problems in Engineering, Drones, and Journal of Software (in Chinese), and
also a Program Committee Member of many international conferences. He is
currently an Associate Editor for the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMPUTATIONAL
SOCIAL SYSTEMS.
Ziyuan Zhou received the B.S. degree from the
ChinaUniversity of Mining and Technology,Xuzhou,
China, in 2020. She is currently working toward
the Ph.D. degree in computer software and theory
with the Department of Computer Science, Tongji
University, Shanghai, China. Her research interests
include reinforcement learning, multi-agent system,
and adversarial attacks.
Kaiwen Zhang received the M.S. degree from the
College of Automation Engineering, Shanghai Uni-
versity of Electric Power, Shanghai, China, in 2021.
He is currently working toward the Ph.D. degree in
computer software and theory with the Department of
Computer Science, Tongji University, Shanghai. His
research interests include software analysis, petri net,
and formal veriﬁcation.
Jiacun Wang (Senior Member, IEEE) received the
Ph.D. degree in computer engineering from the Nan-
jing University of Science and Technology, Nanjing,
China, in 1991. He was a Research Associate with the
School of Computer Science, Florida International
University, Miami, FL, USA. From 2001 to 2004,
he was a Member of Scientiﬁc Staff with Nortel
Networks, Richardson, TX, USA. He is currently a
Professor of Software Engineering with Monmouth
University, West Long Branch, NJ, USA. He has
authored Timed Petri Nets: Theory and Application
Kluwer (1998), Real-Time Embedded Systems (Wiley, 2018), and Formal Meth-
ods in Computer Science (CRC, 2019), edited Handbook of Finite State Based
Models and Applications (CRC, 2012), and published more than 130 research
papers in journals and conferences. His research interests include software engi-
neering,discreteeventsystems,formalmethods,machinelearning,andreal-time
distributed systems. Dr. Wang was the General Chair, Program Chair, special
session Chair, or Steering Committee Chair of many international conferences.
He was an Associate Editor for the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SYSTEMS, MAN,
AND CYBERNETICS–PART C: APPLICATIONS AND REVIEWS PUBLICATION INFOR-
MATION. He is an Associate Editor for IEEE/CAA JOURNAL OF AUTOMATICA
SINICA.
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Texas at Arlington. Downloaded on June 27,2026 at 06:13:32 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
