Robust Multi-agent Federated Reinforcement 
Learning for Task Ofﬂoading 
Dibao Yan1,2,3, Yongfeng Wang1,2,3, Wenjing Hou1,2,3, Huanhuan Song1,2,3, 
Hong Wen1,2,3envelope symbol, Wendi Ma1,2,3, and Fan Sun1,2,3 
1 School of Aeronautics and Astronautics, University of Electronic Science and Technology of 
China, Chengdu 611731, People’s Republic of China 
{wyf_kt,hwj,hhs_communi,sunlike}@uestc.edu.cn 
2 Aircraft Swarm Intelligent Sensing and Cooperative Control Key Laboratory of Sichuan 
Province, Chengdu 611731, China 
3 Sichuan Intelligent IoT Communication Technology Engineering Research Center, UESTC, 
Chengdu, China 
Abstract. With the proliferation of various mobile smart devices, edge comput-
ing and computational ofﬂoading technologies have emerged as pivotal support 
mechanisms, enhancing the service quality of these devices. To facilitate the learn-
ing of task ofﬂoading strategies across diverse and complex scenarios, this study 
introduces a federated learning strategy algorithm based on multi-agent deep rein-
forcement learning. This algorithm aims to aggregate the training strategies of 
multiple edge computing devices, thereby enabling the synthesis of superior task 
ofﬂoading strategies tailored to a wide array of environments while also providing 
safeguards against malicious nodes. This paper speciﬁcally examines the reward 
inversion attack, illustrating the algorithm’s capability to identify and counteract 
such malicious threats effectively. Experimental results validate that the proposed 
algorithm not only robustly defends against these attacks but also adeptly learns 
the task ofﬂoading strategies pertinent to each node. 
Keywords: task ofﬂoading cdotmalicious node detection cdotfederated learning cdot
multi-agent deep reinforcement learning cdotinsert 
1 
Introduction 
With the advancement of 5G mobile communication technologies and the widespread 
adoption of smart terminals, Internet of Things (IoT) technology is increasingly being 
deployed in diverse applications, including smart robots, various cameras, sensors, 
and other devices. Mobile terminals have an increasingly high demand for comput-
ing power [1], and the current mobile terminal devices have a trend of miniaturization 
and lightweight development, so that they can be applied to more scenarios. 
The lightweight of the Internet of Things terminal leads to its poor computing power. 
It is difﬁcult to deal with a variety of complex computing tasks in a timely manner, and it 
is also facing the rapid loss of electricity. These problems seriously affect the operating
© The Author(s) 2025 
P. Siarry et al. (Eds.): WCNA 2023, LNEE 1361, pp. 211–218, 2025. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-96-2409-6_21 

212
D. Yan et al.
efﬁciency of the device and the user experience. In order to solve the above problems, 
edge computing and computational ofﬂoading technologies came into being and play a 
key role in the intelligent interconnection of the Internet of Things and the Internet of 
vehicles [2]. 
Edge computing positions resources at the edge of the network closer to users to 
provide IT service environment and cloud computing capabilities for mobile networks, 
thus providing users with ultra-low latency and high-efﬁciency network service solutions 
[3, 4]. As one of the key technologies in edge computing, computing ofﬂoading refers 
to the technology in which terminal devices transfer part or all computing tasks to the 
cloud computing environment to solve the shortcomings of mobile devices in resource 
storage, computing performance and energy efﬁciency. 
The task ofﬂoading process always affected by many aspects, such as the external 
environment and the ofﬂoading system. Therefore, in order to enable edge computing 
devices to learn task ofﬂoading policies in a variety of complex task ofﬂoading scenarios, 
the training strategies of multiple edge computing devices are aggregated in combination 
with the characteristics of distributed security data sharing based on federated learning 
[5]. Learn better task ofﬂoading strategies to adapt to more diverse scenarios. At the 
same time, there are often multiple data nodes in federated learning, and whether each 
data node is safe and reliable is another key issue. 
In this paper, a federated learning strategy algorithm based on multi-agent deep 
reinforcement learning is proposed. The main objective of this strategy is to aggregate 
the task ofﬂoading policies of each target agent, and detect the security of each node 
participating in federated aggregation to avoid damage to the system caused by malicious 
nodes. 
Speciﬁcally, the contributions of this paper include: 
(1) Federated Aggregation: By performing FedAvg (Federated Averaging) [6]  on  the  
data of participating aggregation nodes, each node can learn the strategies of other 
agents and improve the universality of the agent.
(2) Malicious Node Detection: The federated aggregation approach outlined in this paper 
extends beyond mere FedAvg; it also entails the detection of data involved in the 
aggregation. This is achieved through the use of Euclidean distance and Modiﬁed 
Z-score methodologies to identify and exclude data from abnormal nodes. 
(3) Experimental Veriﬁcation: The robustness of the algorithm is tested through reward 
ﬂip attacks on individual agents participating in federated reinforcement learning. 
The comparative performance of the algorithm, both with and without the presence 
of malicious nodes, is empirically validated. The experimental data substantiate the 
method’s resilience in the face of malicious nodes within the context of federated 
reinforcement learning. 
2 
System Model 
2.1 
Task Ofﬂoading Model 
For each edge computing device, the optimization objective of task ofﬂoading is to mini-
mize the computational delay and energy consumption of device terminal task processing 
within its respective region.

Robust Multi-agent Federated Reinforcement Learning
213
Regarding local computing, the computational delay for tasks completed locally is 
deﬁned as: 
up per T 
Su
bscript n Superscript l o c a l Baseline equals StartFraction upper T a s k Subscript n Baseline left parenthesis t right parenthesis sigma Over y Subscript n Superscript l o c a l Baseline EndFraction
upper T
 S
ubscript n Superscript l o c a l Baseline equals StartFraction upper T a s k Subscript n Baseline left parenthesis t right parenthesis sigma Over y Subscript n Superscript l o c a l Baseline EndFraction
The variable upper T a s k Subscript n Baseline left parenthesis t right parenthesisup per T 
Subscript n Superscript l o c a l
represents the task load, y Subsc
ript n Superscript l o c a l
denotes the number of 
CPU cycles for device n, and sigmasigniﬁes the number of CPU cycles required to complete 
a unit task. 
The energy consumption for local computation is given by: 
upper E
 
Subscript n Sup
e
rscr ipt l 
o
 c a l Baseline left parenthesis t right parenthesis equals alpha left parenthesis y Subscript n Superscript l o c a l Baseline right parenthesis cubed upper T Subscript n Superscript l o c a l
where alphais the energy consumption coefﬁcient. 
For edge computing, the total latency is composed of transmission latency and com-
putation latency. The transmission latency is related to the communication transmission 
rate. The maximum uplink rate, calculated based on the Shannon formula, is given by: 
upper C Subscript n B aseline left parenthesis t right parenthesis equals upper W Subscript n Baseline left parenthesis t right parenthesis log Subscript 2 Baseline left parenthesis 1 plus StartFraction p Subscript n Baseline left parenthesis t right parenthesis h Subscript n Baseline left parenthesis t right parenthesis Over upper N 0 EndFraction right parenthesis
upp
e
r C Subscript n Baseline left parenthesis t right parenthesis equals upper W Subscript n Baseline left parenthesis t right parenthesis log Subscript 2 Baseline left parenthesis 1 plus StartFraction p Subscript n Baseline left parenthesis t right parenthesis h Subscript n Baseline left parenthesis t right parenthesis Over upper N 0 EndFraction right parenthesis
where p Subscript n Baseline left parenthesis t right parenthesisis the transmission power, h Subscript n Baseline left parenthesis t right parenthesisis the channel gain, upper W Subscript n Baseline left parenthesis t right parenthesisrepresents the 
bandwidth, and upper N 0 is the Gaussian noise power spectral density. Consequently, the 
transmission latency is: 
up per T Subscript n Superscript e d g e normal bar t r a n s Baseline equals StartFraction upper T a s k Subscript n Baseline left parenthesis t right parenthesis Over upper C Subscript n Baseline left parenthesis t right parenthesis EndFractio
n
upper T Subscript n Superscript e d g e normal bar t r a n s Baseline equals StartFraction upper T a s k Subscript n Baseline left parenthesis t right parenthesis Over upper C Subscript n Baseline left parenthesis t right parenthesis EndFraction
The computation latency is: 
up per T Subscript n Superscript e d g e normal bar c o m p Baseline equals StartFraction upper T a s k Subscript n Baseline left parenthesis t right parenthesis sigma Over y Subscript n Superscript e d g e Baseline EndFractio
n
upper 
T 
Subscript n Superscript e d g e normal bar c o m p Baseline equals StartFraction upper T a s k Subscript n Baseline left parenthesis t right parenthesis sigma Over y Subscript n Superscript e d g e Baseline EndFraction
Thus, the total latency is 
up per T
 S
ubsc ript n Supe
r
scri pt e d g e
 
Baseline equals upper T Subscript n Superscript e d g e normal bar t r a n s Baseline plus upper T Subscript n Superscript e d g e normal bar c o m p
The energy consumption for edge computing consists of transmission energy 
consumption and edge server computation energy consumption: 
upper 
E 
Subscript n Superscript e d g e Baseline equals p Subscript n Baseline left parenthesis t right parenthesis upper T Subscript n Superscript e d g e normal bar t r a n s Baseline plus alpha left parenthesis y Subscript n Superscript e d g e Baseline right parenthesis cubed upper T Subscript n Superscript e d g e normal bar c o m p
Therefore, for the task ofﬂoading strategy: 
x Subscript n Baseline left parenthesis t right parenthesis equals StartLayout Enlarged left brace 1st Row 1st Column 0 2nd Column l o c a l 2nd Row 1st Column 1 2nd Column e d g e EndLayout

214
D. Yan et al.
When the task needs to be ofﬂoaded to the edge server, x Subscript n Baseline left parenthesis t right parenthesisis set to 1, otherwise it 
is set to 0. Consequently, the total energy efﬁciency function is: 
StartLa
y
o
ut 1
st R ow 1st Column uppe
r 
A left parenthesis x right parenthesis 2nd Column equals sigma summation Underscript n equals 1 Overscript upper N Endscripts left parenthesis left parenthesis 1 minus x Subscript n Baseline left parenthesis t right parenthesis right parenthesis left parenthesis upper C Subscript e Baseline upper E Subscript n Superscript l o c a l Baseline plus upper C Subscript t Baseline upper T Subscript n Superscript l o c a l Baseline right parenthesis 2nd Row 1st Column Blank 2nd Column plus x Subscript n Baseline left parenthesis t right parenthesis left parenthesis upper C Subscript e Baseline upper E Subscript n Superscript e d g e Baseline plus upper C Subscript t Baseline upper T Subscript n Superscript e d g e Baseline right parenthesis right parenthesis EndLayout
where upper C Subscript e is the energy consumption coefﬁcient, and upper C Subscript t is the latency coefﬁcient. 
The task ofﬂoading optimization problem is to ﬁnd the strategy x Subscript n Baseline left parenthesis t right parenthesisthat minimizes 
upper A left parenthesis x right parenthesis. The energy efﬁciency function given by (9) cannot be directly solved. For such 
complex problems, deep reinforcement learning is more suitable for ﬁnding the solution. 
2.2 
Multi-agent Deep Reinforcement Learning Algorithm 
The core concept of Twin Delayed Deep Deterministic Policy Gradient (TD3) [7]  is  to  
utilize two independent Q-networks and a delayed policy update mechanism to mitigate 
estimation bias and prevent excessive policy updates. Speciﬁcally, TD3 maintains two 
value function networks (Critic) and a policy function network (Actor). During the value 
update process, TD3 employs the minimum estimates from the two critic networks for 
updates, which helps to reduce bias in the estimates. Additionally, TD3 adopts a delayed 
update strategy, where the policy function is updated only after several value function 
updates, enhancing the algorithm’s stability. The TD3 algorithm also introduces target 
policy smoothing, which involves adding limited-amplitude noise to the target policy 
during updates, further improving the stability of the l earning process.
2.3 
Malicious Node Detection 
After each round of federated aggregation, the neural network parameters of each node 
are identical. As the nodes continue distributed training, it can be considered that all nodes 
are iteratively training in the same direction. Consequently, the Euclidean distances of 
the neural network parameters between nodes will diverge. 
Speciﬁcally, during federated aggregation, the Euclidean distance of the neural net-
work parameters of each node is ﬁrst calculated. Then, the Modiﬁed Z-score algorithm 
is used for outlier detection. This algorithm is an improvement of the Z-score algorithm. 
The Z-score normalization method is as follows: 
z S ubscr ipt i Baseline equals StartFraction x Subscript i Baseline minus mu Over delta EndFraction
z 
Subscript i Baseline equals StartFraction x Subscript i Baseline minus mu Over delta EndFraction
where muis the mean, x Subscript i represents the observed value of the sample, deltarepresents the 
standard deviation of all observed values, and z Subscript i indicates how many standard deviations 
the sample point is from the sample mean. This is used to represent the relative position 
of each raw data point within the dataset. 
Since the mean and standard deviation are highly sensitive to outliers, the conven-
tional Z-score method can lead to biased results. Therefore, the Modiﬁed Z-score method 
is introduced: 
z S ubscr ipt i Baseline equals StartFraction x Subscript i Baseline minus m e d i a n left parenthesis x Subscript i Baseline right parenthesis Over k asterisk upper M upper A upper D EndFraction
z Subsc
ript i Baseline equals StartFraction x Subscript i Baseline minus m e d i a n left parenthesis x Subscript i Baseline right parenthesis Over k asterisk upper M upper A upper D EndFraction

Robust Multi-agent Federated Reinforcement Learning
215
where x Subscript i is the observed sample value, m e d i a n left parenthesis x Subscript i Baseline right parenthesisis the median of all observed sample 
values, k is a constant factor, and MAD (Median Absolute Deviation) is deﬁned as: 
uppe r M upper A upper D equals
 m e d i a n StartAbsoluteValue x Subscript i Baseline minus m e d i a n left parenthesis x Subscript i Baseline right parenthesis EndAbsoluteValue
When the condition: 
StartAbsoluteValue z Subscript i Baseline EndAbsoluteValue greater than t h r e s h o l d
is met, the data can be considered an outlier, potentially originating from a malicious 
node. 
3 
Algorithm Design 
This paper proposes a federated learning strategy algorithm based on a multi-agent deep 
reinforcement learning framework. The algorithm ﬁrst identiﬁes and eliminates potential 
malicious nodes by analyzing the model Euclidean distance. Following this, it aggregates 
the neural network parameters of each node, thereby effectively obtaining the learning 
parameters while mitigating the risk of attacks from malicious nodes. 
The procedure of our algorithm is as follows: 
(1) Set up multiple tasks ofﬂoading scenarios and establish a basic federated learn-
ing environment. Initialize the parameters of each edge computing device and the 
relevant parameters for federated aggregation. 
(2) Set up the reinforcement learning environment, initializing two critic networks upper Q Subscript theta Baseline 1
and upper Q Subscript theta Baseline 2, as well as their corresponding target networks upper Q Subscript theta Baseline 1 prime and upper Q Subscript theta Baseline 2 prime. Initialize 
an actor network mu Subscript phi and its corresponding target actor network mu Subscript phi prime. Initialize the 
experience replay buffer, used to store experience tuples left parenthesis s comma a comma r comma s prime comma d right parenthesis
, where s is the 
state, a is the action, r is the reward, s prime is the next state, and d indicates whether it is a 
terminal state. Finally, copy the current reinforcement learning network parameters 
to the remaining agents. 
(3) The agent executes the task ofﬂoading decision, obtaining a set of samples 
left parenthesis s comma a comma r comma s prime comma d right parenthesis
and storing them in the experience replay buffer. Samples are then 
drawn from the replay buffer to update the Actor and Critic networks. For each 
drawn sample left parenthesis s comma a comma r comma s prime comma d right parenthesis
, the next action a prime is generated using the target actor 
network mu Subscript phi prime Baseline left parenthesis s prime right parenthesis
and action noise. The target values are calculated using the target 
critic networks upper Q Subscript theta 1 prime and upper Q Subscript theta 2 prime. The critic networks upper Q Subscript theta Baseline 1 and upper Q Subscript theta Baseline 2 are updated based 
on the target values and minimizing the evaluation error. The actor network mu Subscript phi
is updated by optimizing ϕ through the maximization o f upper Q Subscript theta Baseline 1 Baseline left parenthesis s comma mu Subscript phi Baseline left parenthesis s right parenthesis right parenthesis
. The target 
networks’ parameters are updated using a soft update strategy. 
(4) Each node uploads its model data to the aggregation node. The aggregation node 
screens out outliers based on the Euclidean distance using the Modiﬁed Z-score 
method. The remaining reliable model data are then aggregated using the FedAvg 
algorithm, and the updated model data are distributed back to each node. 
(5) Repeat steps (3)–(4).

216
D. Yan et al.
4 
Experimental Results Analysis 
4.1 
Basic Experimental Setup 
The experiment set up ﬁve task ofﬂoading scenarios and ﬁve task ofﬂoading decision-
making agents, with the total number of aggregation rounds set to 10,000. After each 
aggregation, each node performs 10 model updates, with a batch size of 128 for each 
update. Since the goal of reinforcement learning is to maximize the reward through 
learning strategies, it is necessary to invert the energy efﬁciency function in (9), trans-
forming the minimization problem of the energy efﬁciency value into a maximization 
problem. 
This paper addresses the participation of malicious nodes in federated aggregation by 
modifying the training set during the local training of the model. The following section 
presents the simulation experiment results and analysis in the presence of malicious 
nodes participating in the aggregation algorithm. 
4.2 
Malicious Node Attacks 
Fig. 1. Reward curves of normal nodes and malicious nodes
As shown by the blue line in Fig. 1, the reward value of the agent gradually converges 
to the optimal value with iterative training. The orange line demonstrates that the presence 
of malicious nodes gradually reduces the reward value as training progresses, eventually 
converging to the worst value. This indicates that malicious nodes consistently attempt 
to enforce the worst task ofﬂoading strategy. 
Figure 2 illustrates the reward curve in the presence of malicious nodes among the 
nodes participating in federated aggregation. When there is no attack and the FedAvg

Robust Multi-agent Federated Reinforcement Learning
217
Fig. 2. Performance of the proposed algorithm in the presence of malicious node (Color ﬁgure 
online) 
algorithm is used for aggregation, as shown by the blue line in Fig. 2, the reward curve 
converges to around −230 after 3700 aggregation rounds. In the presence of a malicious 
node participating in federated aggregation, the malicious node learns the worst strategy 
by inverting the reward in the experience replay pool. When this node participates in 
FedAvg, the aggregated reward curve, depicted by the orange line, ﬂuctuates within the 
range of [−350, 350] and shows no convergence trend. However, when the Modiﬁed 
Z-score method is applied in the scenario with an attack, as shown by the green line, 
the reward curve gradually converges at 3800 rounds, and the overall curve closely 
resembles the blue line in the no-attack scenario. This demonstrates that the federated 
learning strategy algorithm based on the TD3 deep reinforcement learning algorithm 
proposed in this paper can achieve similar performance to that in a no-attack scenario 
while resisting certain attacks. 
5 
Conclusion 
This paper proposes a federated learning strategy based on a multi-agent deep reinforce-
ment learning algorithm. The algorithm can effectively identify malicious attacks and 
maintain performance similar to that in scenarios without attacks. Through experimen-
tal validation in simulated attack scenarios, this paper demonstrates that the algorithm 
exhibits excellent defense performance in the presence of malicious nodes utilizing 
reward inversion attacks. 
Acknowledgement. This work is supported by NSFC under Grant U23B2021 and 62201132.

218
D. Yan et al.
References 
1. Apostolopoulos, P.A., Fragkos, G., Tsiropoulou, E.E., Papavassiliou, S.: Data ofﬂoading in 
UAV-assisted multi-access edge computing systems under resource uncertainty. IEEE Trans. 
Mob. Comput. 22(1), 175–190 (2023) 
2. Yang, C., Liu, Y., Chen, X., Zhong, W., Xie, S.: Efﬁcient mobility-aware task ofﬂoading for 
vehicular edge computing networks. IEEE Access 7, 26652–26664 (2019) 
3. Chen, X., et al.: Information freshness-aware task ofﬂoading in air-ground integrated edge 
computing systems. IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun. 40(1), 243–258 (2022) 
4. Lai, X., Fan, L., Lei, X., Deng, Y., Karagiannidis, G.K., Nallanathan, A.: Secure mobile edge 
computing networks in the presence of multiple eavesdroppers. IEEE Trans. Commun. 70(1), 
500–513 (2022) 
5. Qiao, D., Liu, G., Guo, S., He, J.: Adaptive federated learning for non-convex optimization 
problems in edge computing environment. IEEE Trans. Netw. Sci. Eng. 9(5), 3478–3491 (2022) 
6. Mahan, B., Moore, E., Ramage, D., Hampson, S., Arcas, B.A.: Communication-efﬁcient 
learning of deep networks from decentralized data. Artif. Intell. Stat., 1273–1282 (2017) 
7. Kang, C., et al.: TD3 algorithm based on dynamic delay policy update. J. Jilin Univ. (Inf. Sci. 
Ed.) 38(4), 474–481 (2020) 
Open Access This chapter is licensed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 
International License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/), which permits use, sharing, 
adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate 
credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons license and 
indicate if changes were made. 
The images or other third party material in this chapter are included in the chapter’s Creative 
Commons license, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not 
included in the chapter’s Creative Commons license and your intended use is not permitted by 
statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from 
the copyright holder.
