I.J. Information Technology and Computer Science, 2016, 9, 39-48 
Published Online September 2016 in MECS (http://www.mecs-press.org/) 
DOI: 10.5815/ijitcs.2016.09.06 
Copyright © 2016 MECS                      I.J. Information Technology and Computer Science, 2016, 9, 39-48 
A Survey on Fault Tolerant Multi Agent System 
 
Yasir Arfat 
Department of Computer Science King Abdul Aziz University Jeddah, Saudi Arabia. 
E-mail: yasirarfat081@gmail.com 
 
Fathy Elbouraey Eassa 
Department of Computer Science King Abdul Aziz University Jeddah, Saudi Arabia. 
E-mail: fathy55@yahoo.com 
 
 
Abstract—A multi-agent system (MAS) is formed by a 
number of agents connected together to achieve the 
desired goals specified by the design. Usually in a multi 
agent system, agents work on behalf of a user to 
accomplish 
given 
goals. 
In 
MAS 
co-ordination, 
co-operation, 
negotiation 
and 
communication 
are 
important aspects to achieve fault tolerance in MAS. The 
multi-agent system is likely to fail in a distributed 
environment and as an outcome of such, the resources for 
MAS may not be available due to the failure of an agent, 
machine crashes, process failure, software failure, 
communication failure and/or hardware failure. Therefore, 
many 
researchers 
have 
proposed 
fault 
tolerance 
approaches to overcome the failure in MAS. So we have 
surveyed these approaches in this paper, whereby our 
contribution is threefold. Firstly, we have provided 
taxonomy of faults and techniques in MAS. Secondly, we 
have provided a qualitative comparison of existing fault 
tolerance approaches. Thirdly, we have provided an 
evaluation of existing fault tolerance techniques. Results 
show that most of the existing schemes are not very 
efficient, due to various reasons like high computation 
costs, costly replication and large communication 
overheads. 
 
Index Terms—Multi Agent System, Fault Tolerance, 
Agents, Adaptive Replication, Redundancy. 
 
I. INTRODUCTION 
A Multi-agent system (MAS) is composed of multiple 
interacting intelligent agents, within a given environment. 
These agents co-operate to solve difficulties that are 
beyond the capability or knowledge of each single 
problem solver. There are several key characteristics of 
agents, such as adaptation, scalability, re-usability, local 
view, autonomy, responsiveness and distribution. In order 
to achieve the necessary goals, agents are required to be 
able to communicate with many other agents in the 
environment ref. Byrski et al.[1] There are various 
applications 
of 
MAS 
like 
aircraft 
maintenance, 
environment monitoring, military demining, surveillance, 
internet agent, health care, spacecraft control and 
industrial monitoring [2][3][4]. 
In this paper, we focused on the fault tolerance of MAS. 
There are various fault tolerance needs that MAS should 
be contained in, in order to mitigate failure. 
 
 
Agents need to collaborate with each other to 
avoid failure 
 
Information sent over MAS should be transparent 
during transmission 
 
Availability of other agents in MAS should be 
ensured when an agent fails 
 
The agent’s system should have the ability to take 
decisions based on knowledge 
 
Agents need to communicate in a secure manner 
and data should be protected in case of failure 
 
Agents should have autonomy in case of failure. 
They should be able to provide services without 
affecting other agents 
 
An agent should have scalability and complexity so 
that it can deal with any size of agent without 
affecting performance 
 
An agent should be robust enough to confront any 
failure i.e. process failure, crashing failure etc. 
whereby it can provide services without any 
interruption. 
 
Agents should have the ability to adapt to any 
condition, in any environment, in case of failure. 
 
In MAS, there are several factors that decrease 
performance and reliability. One of these is a failure of 
the system. If there is any fault in the system, it will stop 
working and cause a delay in achieving the required goals. 
In order to increase the reliability of MAS, the system 
should be fault tolerant. If there is any fault in the system 
it should have the ability to mask the failure in order to 
continue providing the necessary services without any 
delay ref. Abbas et al.[5]. If a system is fault tolerant then 
it will also increase the performance of the system. 
In this research paper, we classify the fault tolerant 
multi-agent system (FTMAS) into different categories, on 
the basis of recovery techniques and by presenting the 
taxonomy of both faults and techniques. Also, we have 
provided a qualitative comparison of the recent fault 
recovery of MAS. We discovered that researchers are 
applying replication and non replication based fault 
recovery approaches for FTMAS. We also examined 
existing techniques on the basis of their attributes such as, 
characteristics, failures, types of agents, environment and 
replication protocol.

40 
A Survey on Fault Tolerant Multi Agent System 
 
Copyright © 2016 MECS                      I.J. Information Technology and Computer Science, 2016, 9, 39-48 
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section II 
contains a brief background of FTMAS, Section III 
briefly describes a summary of existing literature. Section 
IV presents a taxonomy of FTMAS. In section V, we 
have provided a comparison of FTMAS with other 
techniques. Section VI summarizes the advantages and 
disadvantages of existing techniques in FTMAS. In 
section VII, we conducted an evaluation. In section VIII, 
we have discussed future challenges and issues. Finally, 
section IX concludes the paper. 
 
II.  BACKGROUND 
Multi agent system comprises of various agents, 
entities etc. A single agent is capable of carrying out 
independent actions to achieve the delegated goals. This 
agent system may work in different environments 
according to the tasks set to it, responsibilities assigned to 
it by the system or program inside the agent system. 
Figure1 shows the basic operation and work performed 
by the agent system 
 
 
Fig.1. A multi agent system 
A specific agent will carry out specific goals in the 
multi agent system, for example: Environment: Patient & 
hospital, Goal: Healthy patients, Actions: Tests and 
treatments, Percepts: Patient symptoms, Agent Type: 
Medical diagnosis. An agent has a range of characteristics 
i.e. 
reactiveness, reliability, scalability, autonomy, 
robustness, intelligence, persistency, goal-orientation, 
adaptability and sociability. These are the basic 
characteristics of an agent that it contains. 
In multi agent systems (MAS), several agents are 
working together to achieve task-oriented goals on behalf 
of the user or human ref. Maciel et al.[6] Successful 
interaction is required among agents in MAS to negotiate, 
coordinate and cooperate with each agent in the 
environment ref. Gerrard et al.[7] The best examples of 
MAS are Internet agents and as used in Spacecraft control 
ref. Li et al.[8] Nowadays, researchers and developers 
alike are using the agent in the distributed environment, 
such as those used as environment agents who need 
co-ordination, co-operation, and negotiation. These are 
the basic issues that MAS has in each environment ref. 
Davoodi et al.[9]. As the failure rate increases when there 
is less co-ordination, co-operation and communication 
among the agents, this leads to the failure of the system. 
Hence, these types of failures are subject to the host, 
machine and exception set ref. Wang al.[10]. 
There are several fault tolerance MAS techniques that 
have been proposed to mask the faults in MAS. Each 
technique differs in its ability to mask failure in MAS. 
III.  LITERATURE REVIEW 
This 
section 
presents 
an 
overview 
of 
the 
state-of-the-art of fault tolerance techniques in the multi 
agent system (FTMAS). This overview comprises of 
discussion 
about 
the 
assumptions, 
objectives, 
methodologies and key approaches present in existing 
works. Based on this section, we will present a taxonomy 
and comparison in the following sections. 
A.  Towards FTMAS Architecture 
Kumar et al. [11] describe that there were many 
possibilities that failure could happen at any time in MAS 
of any distributed system. Many agents were not 
available due to process failure, exceptions and 
breakdown of communication. There were many faults 
that existed ranging from database recovery, TS 
monitoring, resource manager and fault tolerance 
distributive systems up to application server. There were 
many issues in these techniques, such as using replication 
schemes as a critical system for monitoring. However, 
when it increases the reliability of the system it duplicates 
the data and services. Moreover, many systems saved the 
application state but it also created many problems during 
recovery. To overcome this traditional fault tolerance 
technique they proposed Adaptive Agent Architecture 
(AAA) for the multi-agent system (MAS). Whereby, 
AAA overcomes a problem like a broker failure without 
incurring undue overheads. There may be more than one 
of many such brokers in the large multi-agent system. In 
the case of sudden unavailability of a broker in AAA, 
they used the team based approach for automatic 
recovery of MAS. Furthermore for the recovery, they 
assumed three different recovery schemes, namely logical 
characterization, recovery scheme and recovery scenario. 
In these assumptions, they described different steps, 
theorems and characterizations of performance. Their 
results show that autonomous agents can make a 
multi-agent system more robust. 
B.  Towards Adaptive FTDMAS 
Marin et al. [12] have also proposed an adaptive 
architecture for the multi-agent system (MAS). It deals 
with existing problems in MAS using new methodologies. 
MAS as a distributed system may by its very nature 
accrue failure at any time in the system. Moreover, due to 
it being a distributed system, computations of dynamic 
applications were often changed, during execution. 
Nevertheless, they tried to make it more flexible to 
overcome the flaws of the conventional system. On the 
proposed architecture, we can either replicate or replicate 
the software element on the spot. The advantage of this 
approach is that we can change replication tactics in a 
matter of a few seconds. The main objective of selected 
architecture is to make fault tolerance more efficient for 
MAS, using selective replication techniques. An outcome 
of this approach is to develop architecture, which is 
suitable for dynamic fault tolerance for applications. 
They used the selective replication scheme as many 
problems existed for approaches to dynamic applications. 
Moreover, they also introduced a framework namely, 

 
A Survey on Fault Tolerant Multi Agent System 
41 
Copyright © 2016 MECS                      I.J. Information Technology and Computer Science, 2016, 9, 39-48 
(dynamic adaptive replication extension) DARX, which 
uses both active and passive replication, specially 
designed for the distributed application. It has many 
advantages i.e. to dynamically add or remove replicas, 
atomic and ordered multicast for each replication group 
etc. To manage the failure of the system, there is a 
replication manager associated with each group which 
performs the following functions: 1)Maintenance of 
information within the group 2)Perform suspension and 
resumption activity 3)Diffusion of a message and 
4)Switching the replication strategy. The benefits of 
performing these functions are that: the replication 
manager can recover the failure quickly; when one group 
fails, the other groups have all the information needed in 
order to active a new replica. A simulation display 
ensures that minimum energy is utilized between nodes to 
carry out the task, as a single copy of data will be sent 
and it also improves the probability of delivery. 
C.  Towards Automatic FTMAS 
Almeida et al. [13] presented an automated fault 
tolerance (FT) MAS scenario. They described that there 
are many possibilities whereby an exception or failure 
can occur at any time in the system. These failures occur 
when recovery and fault tolerance approaches are defined 
at the design level. Indeed, it is very difficult to decide at 
the design level when and where to apply the FT 
approach (i.e. replication). But conventional approaches 
are out of order when it comes to dynamic systems (i.e. 
MAS). These applications could be ambient intelligence 
systems, related to e-commerce, crisis management 
systems or the air traffic control system. According to the 
situation and nature of interdependencies in these 
applications, an agent can change their role during the 
computation stage. Therefore, to overcome all difficulties 
and to make the FT management automatic and dynamic, 
they considered a self-adaptation FT approach.  
In MAS, multiple errors may occur as they are only  
considered as crash type failures. Thus, to mask these 
types of failures, replication is considered an ideal 
approach. There are various types of replication 
approaches, from static to non-static and explicit 
replication. Moreover, for replication they presented 
dynamic and automatic control of replication. Hence, 
they chose a DARX framework, which has dynamic 
distributed replication features. Using this system, they 
have estimated the critical essence of the system by 
concluding with different types of information i.e. 
messages, plans and roles etc. 
D.  Decentralized Architecture for FTMAS 
Khan et al. [14] presented fault tolerant decentralized 
architecture for the multi-agent system. Most applications 
have a lack of fault tolerance. There is an expectation that 
usage of MAS in different distributed applications will 
increase. However, there are many faults existing within 
the agent platform, causing a multitude of problems. To 
overcome 
all 
these 
problems 
they 
introduced 
decentralized architecture, as an alternative to the 
centralized architecture of the agent platform (AP). 
Figure 2 shows the working of decentralized architecture, 
namely Virtual Agent Cluster (VAC). When a single 
agent platform is deployed it includes all machines. A 
similarity exists between virtual agent cluster and cluster 
computing, where the front processor distributes the load 
among the machines. 
Agent Communication Language (ACL) also acts as a 
front processor. It is used as an interface to communicate 
with another agent in the system. The communication 
between machines is bi-directional through IP addresses, 
whereby in each machine there is an Agent Management 
System (AMS). It is organized in such a manner that 
failure of one machine does not affect the other. There are 
several characteristics of this architecture, which includes 
fault tolerance and recovery, autonomy, application 
layering architecture (inter VAC and intra VAC) and load 
balancing. These characteristics make this decentralized 
architecture more flexible in scale and fau lt tolerant. 
Moreover, fault tolerance is the greatest substantial 
advantage that can be achieved through this decentralized 
architecture. 
E.  Plane-Based Replication for FTMAS 
Almeida et al. [15] presented a plane-based replication 
of the fault tolerant multi-agent system. In their proposed 
scheme, they used this method for stipulating the 
dependability for MAS through replication. This method 
is different from others cited above, here they focus on 
predictive and adaptive replication whereby the critical 
agents are replicated to overcome failures. As some of the 
application uses static replication, in contrast here they 
use dynamic replication. The latter has advantages over 
static replication i.e. re-allocation of tasks, changing the 
role of an agent, flexible organization etc. Moreover, it is 
very important to replicate an agent through dynamic and 
automatic means. Here, they are more focused on 
building reliable MAS. Hence, a plan based fault 
tolerance method promising prevention because it 
predicts upcoming behavioral patterns of an agent. To 
make MAS more reliable, original predictive approach 
calculates criticality of the agent dynamically. Then this 
criticality of the agent is used for replication, in a manner 
to increase the dependent ability on the basis of resources 
that are available. They also validated their approach on 
the DARX framework and DIMA. In this strategy, an 
agent is accomplished as DIMA agent and usage of 
DARX in command is used to obtain replication 
capabilities. 
F.  Adaptive and Automated FTMAS 
Singh et al. [16] have proposed this framework for a 
critical agent in the multi-agent system (MAS), based on 
the cardinality of an agent. Sometimes replication can 
become very costly due to the complexity of the system; 
moreover, dynamic replication is also a need of all agents 
in fault tolerance MAS. Hence, to overcome these issues 
they proposed this particular framework. They mixed two 
techniques namely, active and passive replication. 
Thereby, critical agents will actively replicate, more 
focused relatively to other agents. The benefit of this 

42 
A Survey on Fault Tolerant Multi Agent System 
 
Copyright © 2016 MECS                      I.J. Information Technology and Computer Science, 2016, 9, 39-48 
approach is to reduce the complexity of the system, cost, 
optimal utilization and more importantly, optimal fault 
tolerance. The proposed framework is hybrid, having the 
automated and adaptive characteristics of fault tolerance. 
This framework has three different components: 1) 
Replica Store 2) Fault Management Agent (FMA) and 3) 
Event Monitoring Agent (EMA). 
In replica store central fault management unit (CFMU) 
divides it into two phases, active and passive replica store. 
A passive replica is used to update the agent periodically. 
For critical agents, active replica are used to having a 
working replica. All faults management control is done 
by the FMA. It also retains information about the 
replication, whether it is active or passive replication. The 
last component is EMA, which is responsible for keeping 
track of the information related to crashes, putting in the 
substitute replica for that agent. Results show that fifty 
percent actively replicated agent can remove the 
complexity of the system. Moreover, from the proposed 
system, scalability of the fault tolerance multi-agent 
systems can be improved. 
G.  Hybrid Based Approach for FTMAS 
Koppensteiner et al. [17] have proposed a hybrid fault 
tolerance 
multi-agent system using the heartbeat 
mechanism. They used this mechanism to detect failure in 
MAS. They found three different types of failures here, 
namely: 1) System disturbance 2) Physical Component 
Failure and 3) Software Entity Failure. To recover from 
physical component failure i.e. a failure in tangible 
hardware or failure in block base application controlling 
function, they introduced the heartbeat mechanism. Using 
the heartbeat between the LLC (Low-Level Control layer) 
and HLC (High-Level Control layer) they minimized 
messages to maintain the system’s stability. This 
approach also implements the heartbeat method exclusive 
from distribution of messages on the system. If there is a 
fault inside the system, they can only communicate 
messages if necessary. In a situation of complete failure 
in the system, both LLC and HLC will be used to detect 
which agent has failed. Utilizing the heartbeat method, 
they will try to fix it. 
H.  Choice of Sampling Rates in FTMAS 
Bora et al. [18] proposed fault tolerance in a 
multi-agent system based on the sampling period. To 
increase the fault tolerance in distributed and dynamic 
systems, adaptive replication techniques were very useful. 
But there is one disadvantage of this approach; it 
increases the cost due to adaptive replication. To 
overcome this drawback, a sampling period was 
introduced to minimize the cost. This technique whereby 
it 
monitors critical agents, properly chooses the 
appropriate replication for the agent based on its 
criticality. They applied this technique on abstract 
architecture for adaptive replication. This architecture 
consists of replication manager; which is responsible for 
providing active and passive replication among different 
replica. It also monitors and handles faults inside the 
replica. The Main modules contained in this architecture 
are observation and feedback control. The replication 
manager utilizes these features. The Observation module 
collects information about the system and passes this 
information to feedback control. All this information is 
processed by feedback control, which then decides which 
agent is most critical, having calculated their relative 
critical value. Then it applies the adaptive replication 
policy based on the criticality of the system. This 
architecture covers the crash type of failure in multi-agent 
systems. In this research paper, they also assume that the 
sampling period will maximize accuracy, reduce the cost 
of replication and increase the response time of the 
system. 
I.  A Decision-making based approach for Fault 
Handing in Multi-Agent System 
Mirian, Maryam S. et al. [19] introduced a new 
decision-based technique for fault handling in the 
multi-agent system. They described the multi-agent 
system more like a distributed system where fault can 
occur at any time in the system. In the paper, they 
focused on the faulty agent and their recovery in the 
multi-agent system. In the presented technique, if a fault 
agent requests its other agents or its team agents come to 
know that this agent is faulty and needs help, then there 
are several help requests that exist. However, which help 
request is appropriate and which will be effective are all 
decided at the decision-making phase. At this stage, they 
also use the best fit, first come first serve and shortest job 
first algorithm to making the decision for the help request. 
For this methodology there is no central agent, all agents 
are decentralized. Each agent has knowledge about the 
environment and existing agents in the environment. 
They all also have the ability to perform the task of other 
agents. If an agent fails in the system another agent can 
help based on the decision-making phase. 
J.  Distributed Adaptive Fault-Tolerant Consensus 
Control of Multi-Agent System with Actuator Faults 
Khalili et al. [20] presented a distributed FT consensus 
control of MAS with actuator faults. This FTMAS is 
based on three different assumptions. In this distributed 
system an FT control component was developed to 
perform a two-step process between the agents. The first 
would diagnose the fault in the MAS while the second 
would provide an opportunity to recover in an adaptive 
manner.  These assumptions are constructed using 
mathematical equations and in particular, vectors. Using 
the assumptions, it can check the system’s stability with 
the closed-loop mechanism. The main objective of this 
system is to develop an algorithm that diagnoses and 
recovers faults. A unique feature of this algorithm is that 
it takes an information-neighboring algorithm and applies 
its actions. 
 
IV.  TAXONOMY OF FAULTS IN MAS 
In this section, we have presented a taxonomy of faults 
and their related techniques. First of all, we divided the 
faults into two different categories, namely fail silent and 

 
A Survey on Fault Tolerant Multi Agent System 
43 
Copyright © 2016 MECS                      I.J. Information Technology and Computer Science, 2016, 9, 39-48 
fail uncontrolled. These are the faults we found in a 
different paper that we surveyed. Fail silent faults are 
those, which belong to the crash type of failure. On the 
other hand fail uncontrolled are those failures, where any 
type of fault or failure can occur. The faults are then 
further subdivided into different types as given in Figure 2. 
 
 
Fig.2. Taxonomy of faults in MAS 
 
Fig.3. Taxonomy of techniques against the faults in MAS 
We also found out the taxonomy of the techniques that 
researchers are applying for fault tolerance in the multi 
agent system. We have classified these approaches into 
three different categories. These are replication based, 
non-replication based and hybrid approaches. Then we 
further subdivided these techniques, for example the 
replication based approach has active replication, passive 
replication and adaptive replication. Moreover we also 
further subdivided the non-replication based approaches 
into two different types, these being architecture oriented 
and mathematical/algorithmic, which are given in Figure 
3. These are the existing techniques that are used for fault 
tolerance, if there is any fault in the system using these 
techniques we can avoid failure of the whole system. 
These approaches have their own advantages and 
disadvantages, which vary according to the environment 
where these methods are being applied. 
 
V.  QUALITATIVE COMPARISON OF FTMAS 
In this section, we have provided a qualitative 
comparison of the existing fault tolerance approaches of 
MAS as given in table 1. For this purpose we have used 
the following parameters: 1) Agent type 2) Fault 
tolerance technique 3) Objectives 4) Language 5) Type of 
failure 6) Replication protocol 7) Characteristics and 8) 
Environment. 
According to this table, Kumar et al. [11] have adopted 
the object replication based fault tolerance approach for 
MAS, which has characteristics like autonomy and local 
view, whereby the main objectives of this approach 
achieve a faster fault recovery as they use the broker 
process failure. Moreover, Marin et al. [12] and Almeida 
et al. [15] provide the dynamic replication approach for 
the fault tolerance multi-agent system, having the 
objective to achieve that the agent should execute the 
goal. Furthermore, this technique covers machine and 
host failures, network failure and distributed agent 
failures. They are also using different types of agents, 
namely selective agent and critical agent. Moreover, both 
are using the Knowledge Query Manipulation Language 
(KQML) for agent communication among each other.
Table 1. Qualitative Comparison 
Research 
Paper 
Technique 
Characteristics 
Type of 
Failure 
Replication 
Protocols 
Objectives 
Agent 
Type 
Environment 
Kumar et 
al. [11] 
Adaptive 
Agent 
Architecture 
Autonomy, 
Local views 
i) Machine 
Crashes. 
ii) End of 
broker process. 
iii) Network 
Break Down 
Object group 
replication 
 
i) To achieve 
warm backups. 
ii) Object group 
and virtual 
Synchrony 
Complex 
Agents 
Virtual 
Environment 
Marin et 
al. [12] 
Bypass 
dynamic 
Replication. 
 
Autonomy, Run 
time replication 
change 
i) Host and 
Network 
failures. 
ii) Failure of an 
agent in 
distributed 
applications 
Dynamic 
Replication 
i) Efficient FT 
for MAS through 
Selective Agent 
Replication 
ii) Appropriate 
MA architecture 
for dynamic FT 
Selective 
Agent 
Continuous 
Environment 
Almeida 
et al. [13] 
Self 
adaptation of 
fault 
tolerance 
Autonomous, 
Dynamic, 
automatic 
i) Crash type of 
failure cause 
by the internal 
(hardware 
Adaptive 
Replication 
i) Make 
autonomous the 
Management of 
fault tolerance, 
Critical 
Agent 
Discrete 
Environment 

44 
A Survey on Fault Tolerant Multi Agent System 
 
Copyright © 2016 MECS                      I.J. Information Technology and Computer Science, 2016, 9, 39-48 
 
issue and OS 
crashes) or 
external factor 
(malicious 
attacks, 
environment 
tragedy and 
power failure) 
ii) To make this 
fault tolerance 
management 
dynamic and 
automatic 
Khan et 
al. [14] 
Virtual Agent 
Cluster 
Faster Recovery 
and Fault 
Tolerant, 
Autonomous, 
Architecture for 
application 
layering 
(intraVAC and 
interVAC), 
Balancing the 
Load 
i) Centralized 
AMS lack of 
fault tolerance. 
ii) Centralized 
system become 
bottleneck 
under heavy 
load.  
iii) Utilization 
of information 
service and 
provision 
QOS (timelines 
and reliability) 
Active 
replication 
i) To embrace 
peer-to-peer 
computing 
paradigm. 
ii) Eliminate the 
limitations in 
present in 
existing Agent 
Platform (AP) 
Active 
Agent 
Virtual 
Environment 
Almeida 
et al. [15] 
Replication of 
critical agents  
Predictive, 
Automatic and 
Adaptive 
i) An agent 
failure or a 
machine.  
ii) Host failure 
and process 
failure base on 
adaptive failure 
indicators 
hierarchy. 
Active and 
Passive 
Replication, 
(Dynamicall
y apply) 
i) Provide some 
action based on 
after calculation 
of value of a 
system that will 
be executed by 
the agent near 
future in case of 
failure of an 
agent.  
ii) Each agent 
should execute 
each plan 
(action) in order 
to achieve the 
goal. 
Critical 
Agent 
Continuous 
Environment 
Singh et 
al. [16] 
Automatic 
and adaptive 
fault 
recovery,  
Central fault 
Management 
Local views 
i) Crash or 
failure of an 
agent. 
ii) Critical 
agent failure 
Adaptive 
Replication 
i) Using the both 
active and 
passive 
replication make 
the MAS more 
scalable, reliable 
and fault 
tolerant. 
ii) To reduce cost 
and complexity 
of the system. 
Critical 
Agent 
Transient 
Environment 
Koppenste
ir et al. 
[17] 
Heartbeat 
mechanism 
(failure 
detection), 
Supervisor 
Agent 
Approach 
(system 
failure 
absorption, 
fault 
recovery) 
 
Autonomous, 
Local views 
i) Physical 
Components 
failure 
(Breakdown of 
whole 
resource, 
temporary 
failure) 
ii) Software 
entity failure 
iii) Partially 
agent failures 
 
 
i) To increase the 
stability of the 
system 
To shorter the 
reaction time. 
ii) To enhance 
the fault 
tolerance of a 
complex system 
Complex 
Agent 
Discrete 
Environment 
Khalili et 
al. [20] 
Distributed 
adaptive 
fault-tolerant 
Autonomous, 
Adaptive. 
i) Crash failure  
ii) failure of an 
agents 
Adaptive 
Replication 
To reduce the 
cost of 
replication in 
MAS and 
computation 
overhead. 
Critical 
Agent 
Discrete 
Environment 
 
Additionally, Almeida et al. [13] and Khan et al. [14] 
also presented a replication and non-replication based 
approach respectively. To overcome the drawback of the 
Khan et al. [14] centralized MAS system, they presented 
decentralized 
architecture 
whereby 
centralized 
architecture was thought to develop bottlenecks under a 
heavy load. They have used the Agent Communication 
Language (ACL) for communication between agents by 
using active agents. The main objectives of this technique 
are i) To embrace a peer-to-peer computing paradigm and 

 
A Survey on Fault Tolerant Multi Agent System 
45 
Copyright © 2016 MECS                      I.J. Information Technology and Computer Science, 2016, 9, 39-48 
ii) To eliminate the limitations present in existing Agent 
Platform (AP).  
On the other hand Almeida et al. [13] have provided 
KQML for the agent. They also used a discrete 
environment where the agents can perform only limited 
actions. The goal of this approach is to make autonomous 
management of fault tolerance and also make this fault 
tolerance management dynamic and automatic. 
Singh, Aarti et al. [16] have provided automatic and 
adaptive fault recovery for the multi-agent system. 
Characteristics of these approaches are a local view and 
autonomy. The main objective of this approach is to 
achieve i) using both active and passive replication to 
make MAS more scalable, reliable and fault tolerant. ii) 
To reduce cost and complexity of the system. They are 
also using the agent in a transient environment. The 
technique that they provided covers the following types 
of failures:  
 
i) Crash or failure of an agent ii) Critical agent failure. 
 
Koppensteiner et al. [17] and Khalili et al. [18] have 
presented the heartbeat mechanism and choice of the 
sampling rate for fault recovery respectively. On the other 
hand these approaches cover physical components failure, 
partial agent failure, crash failure and failure of agents. 
This comparison gives us a clear idea of different 
approaches for fault tolerant multi-agent systems and how 
to deal with these failures using an appropriate approach, 
which is efficient, with less overheads, easy to use and 
less costly. 
Table 2. Pros and Cons of Existing Techniques 
Research Paper 
Technique 
Pros 
Cons 
Kumar et al. [11] 
Adaptive Agent 
Architecture 
i) Effects of recovery on response time. 
ii) Effects of transition on response time. 
iii) Less overheads of using teamwork.  
i) More focused on broker failure 
tolerance. 
ii) Less focused on individual agents. 
iii) Require extra computing for the 
management of brokerage layer.  
Marin et al. [12] 
Bypass dynamic 
Replication 
i) Fast way to handle faults and recovery. 
ii) Improve reliability, fault-tolerance. 
iii) Improve accessibility. 
i) Replication is very costly 
ii) More Computations are required. 
Almeida et al. [13] 
Self adaptation of fault 
tolerance 
(Dynamic adaptation of 
replication strategies) 
i) It provides dynamic replication; we can 
use both active replication and passive 
replication. It provides better recovery. 
i) When we use both active replication and 
passive replication in MAS, such an 
environment proves very costly. 
Khan et al. [14] 
Virtual Agent Cluster 
i) Decartelized MAS is less faulty as 
compared to centralized. 
ii) More reliable. 
iii) Faster as compared to centralized. 
i) It falls short of addressing the 
heterogeneity issue. 
ii) Cost implication of recovery in multi 
organizational context. 
iii) More overheads. 
Almeida et al. [15] 
Replication of critical 
agents  
i) It provides replication for the criticality 
of agent, which is more critical than 
applying the replication for them. 
i) It is very hard to find out which agent is 
more critical in multi agent system for 
fault tolerance.  
Singh et al. [16] 
Automatic and adaptive 
fault recovery, central 
fault Management 
i) Using this approach, it provides 
automatic recovery for faults when they 
occur and adaptive fault recovery. 
i) This approach has high overheads. 
ii) Reliability of this technique is less as 
compared to the other listed techniques in 
this table. 
Koppensteiner et 
al. [17] 
Heartbeat mechanism 
(failure detection)  
and Supervisor agent 
approach (system 
failure absorption, fault 
recovery) 
i) It provides faster fault recovery. 
ii) Sending messages at a specified period 
of time through which it can easily find out 
which agent has failed, thus providing 
quick recovery. 
i) Computation cost is high as it involves a 
lot of work communicating with each 
agent. 
ii) Reliability is very low. 
iii) Very slow technique that causes more 
overheads due to sending regular messages 
after a specified period of time. 
Bora et al. [18] 
Adaptive Replication 
based on sampling 
rates. 
Using the sampling rate replication cost 
will decrease. 
Response time of switching from active to 
passive and visa versa will decrease. 
Fault and reliability can be achieved easily 
using the sampling rate. 
Adaptive replication increases the response 
time of the system. 
i) Adaptive Replication is very costly. 
ii) Overhead will be very high. 
 
VI.  PROS AND CONS OF EXISTING TECHNIQUES 
Here in this section we have described the different 
approaches and their pros & cons using different 
parameters as given above [11], [12], [13], [14], [15], 
[16], [17],[18],[19],[20]. In this section we find out the 
advantages and disadvantages of the fau lt tolerance 
approaches that we surveyed in the literature review. In 
given table 2 we can see that there are some techniques 
that are providing better fault tolerance recovery for any 

46 
A Survey on Fault Tolerant Multi Agent System 
 
Copyright © 2016 MECS                      I.J. Information Technology and Computer Science, 2016, 9, 39-48 
failure of the multi agent system. This shows us how 
much the techniques are effective for fault recovery. 
When the researcher proposed a technique for fault 
tolerance they ignored other aspects of fault tolerance, as 
it can cause high overheads and perform some expensive 
computations. They also decreased the reliability of the 
system and reduced the performance of MAS. Moreover, 
table 2 shows overheads of fault recovery, reliability, 
improvement in performance and computational cost of 
these approaches. 
 
VII.  DISCUSSION OF EVALUATIONS AND COMPARISON 
In this section, we evaluated different schemes and 
accessed them for fault tolerance recovery. Beginning 
with Kumar et al. [11] who proposed adaptive agent 
architecture to mask the failure in the multi-agent system. 
This has several characteristics namely, autonomy, local 
view and mobility. Using this approach they have 
covered different types of failure namely, machine 
crashes, end of broker process and network bread down. 
Moreover, they applied the object group replication for 
redundancy in MAS. The main objective of this approach 
is to achieve warm backup, object group and virtual 
synchrony. Marin, Olivier et al. [12] have proposed the 
dynamic replication technique. Characteristics of this 
approach are Autonomy and it has run time replication 
changes. Using this technique they mask the failure of 
host and network, thus effectively the failure of any agent 
in the distributed environment. They applied dynamic 
replication protocol for redundancy. The main objective 
of this approach provides efficient FT for MAS through 
selective agent replication. Almeida et al. [13] have 
applied self-adaptation of fault tolerance approach having 
the characteristics of dynamic and automatic recovery of 
fault. They tried to mask failures such as: crashes caused 
by internal hardware issues and operating system crashes 
or external malicious attacks, environmental tragedy and 
power failure. They have applied adaptive replication. 
The main objective of this technique is to make 
autonomous the management of fault tolerance and also 
to make this fault tolerance management dynamic and 
automatic. Khan, Abbas et al. [14] have virtual agent 
cluster (VAC) with the following characteristics: Faster 
recovery and fault tolerant, autonomous, architecture for 
application layering into intraVAC and interVAC and 
balancing the load. They tried to mask failures such as 
crashes caused by internal hardware issues and OS 
crashes or external malicious attacks, environmental 
tragedy and power failure using the active replication. 
The main objective of this scheme is to embrace a 
peer-to-peer computing paradigm and eliminate the 
limitations present in existing agent platform (AP). For 
communication of agents with other agents in MAS, they 
have used Agent Communication Language (ACL). 
Almeida, Aknine et al. [15] have provided replication of 
critical agents having features namely, predictive, 
automatic and adaptive. They tried to mask agent or 
machine failure. Host failure and process failure are 
based on an adaptive failure indicators hierarchy. Their 
main objective was that an agent should execute each 
plan (of action) in order to achieve the overall goal.  
Singh et al. [16] chose an automatic and adaptive fault 
recovery and central fault management technique. They 
tried to minimize system crashes, agent failures and 
critical agent failure. Their main objectives are to reduce 
cost and complexity of the system. Meanwhile, 
Koppensteiner et al. [17] have implemented the heartbeat 
mechanism for failure detection, supervisor agent 
approach for system failure absorption and fault recovery. 
They applied this technique to overcome physical 
components failure and breakdown of the whole resource 
including temporary failure. The main goal is to increase 
the stability of the system and shorten the reaction time - 
overall - to enhance the fault tolerance of a complex 
system. In Khalili, Mohsen et al. [20] they have proposed 
a sampling rate in FTMAS which tries to overcome crash 
failures or failures of an agent in the MAS environment, 
whereby they applied adaptive replication for redundancy 
to mask the failure in FTMAS. This technique has 
performed relatively better than other techniques but it 
also has large overheads of FT for recovery. 
Moreover, we have seen that some approaches perform 
better in fault recovery as compared to other techniques. 
Some techniques have higher overheads and perform 
costly computations for fault tolerance. There should be 
an appropriate technique that enhances performance on 
fault recovery, rather than making it suffer. 
 
VIII.  FUTURE CHALLENGES AND ISSUES 
There has been advancement in multi-agent system 
technology and its usage in our daily life is increasing. 
Even though a lot of work has been done for fault 
tolerance in a multi-agent system (FTMAS) but the issue 
regarding failure recovery of MAS has still not been 
overcome yet. As MAS gets further distributed, failure can 
occur at any time. 
There 
are 
various 
challenges 
in 
FTMAS 
implementation. It is still a complex task.  
 
 
From the literature survey, we found that most of 
the existing fault tolerance approaches are not 
providing basic fault recovery features in MAS 
like 
reliability, 
scalability, 
adaptability 
and 
robustness.  
 
A challenging issue in designing fault tolerance 
architecture for Multi Agent system (MAS) is its 
distributed nature, prone to failure at any time. 
 
Another major problem is that there is no standard 
evaluation for the framework of FTMAS that is 
needed for comparison purposes. Currently each 
researcher uses their own criteria for evaluation.  
 
MAS has a lack of reliability in programming tools 
and specialized debugging tools. Skills are also 
needed to shift from an analysis and design phase to 
coding, as well as issues in understanding the 
environment and methodology. 

 
A Survey on Fault Tolerant Multi Agent System 
47 
Copyright © 2016 MECS                      I.J. Information Technology and Computer Science, 2016, 9, 39-48 
IX.  CONCLUSION 
Currently, multi-agent system is being used in different 
applications in a distributed environment. In MAS, as 
there are many agents so there are several challenges that 
can occur. For example, co-ordination, co-operation, 
negotiation 
and 
communication 
in 
a 
distributed 
environment. When one agent does not co-operate due to a 
fault then other components of MAS also do not provide 
their services. Then failures like machine crashes, process 
failure, software failure, communication failure and 
hardware failure occur. Therefore, in this research paper, 
we have surveyed the many techniques for fault tolerance 
in a multi-agent system so that failures can be overcome. 
In this research paper, we have presented existing 
techniques, which are very effective for fault tolerance, by 
providing related work and then classifying these 
approaches into different categories. We also categorized 
failures that occur in the multi agent system. Furthermore, 
we have also provided a qualitative comparison of existing 
fault tolerance approaches. In this comparison, we locate 
different parameters so that we can identify by comparing 
which technique is better for masking a fault in MAS. We 
have provided the pros and cons of existing fault tolerance 
techniques. It shows that most of the existing schemes are 
not efficient due to various reasons like high computation 
cost, costly replication and 
large communication 
overheads. We have found out that when researchers 
proposed a technique for fault tolerance, they ignored its 
overheads which when applied to MAS, proved very 
costly. It provides fault tolerance but on the other hand, it 
also degrades the performance of the system and reliability. 
There should be an appropriate technique, which provides 
fault tolerance with fewer overheads and hence less 
expensive for computation. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
Byrski, Aleksander, Rafał Dreżewski, Leszek Siwik, and 
Marek Kisiel-Dorohinicki. "Evolutionary multi-agent 
systems." The Knowledge Engineering Review 30, no. 02 
(2015): 171-186. 
[2] 
Eddy, Foo, H. B. Gooi, and S. X. Chen. "Multi-Agent 
System 
for 
Distributed 
Management 
of 
Microgrids." Power Systems, IEEE Transactions on 30, 
no. 1 (2015): 24-34. 
[3] 
Sajja, Priti Srinivas. "Automatic Generation of Agents 
using Reusable Soft Computing Code Libraries to develop 
Multi Agent System for Healthcare."International Journal 
of Information Technology and Computer Science 
(IJITCS) 7, no. 5 (2015): 48. 
[4] 
Yadav, Sandeep Singh, and Mandeep Singh Yadav. 
"Development of System for Automated & Secure 
Generation of Content (ASCGS)."International Journal of 
Information Technology and Computer Science (IJITCS) 
7, no. 11 (2015): 81. 
[5] 
Abbas, Hosny Ahmed, Samir Ibrahim Shaheen, and 
Mohammed Hussein Amin. "Organization of multi-agent 
systems: an overview." arXiv preprint arXiv:1506.09032 
(2015). 
[6] 
Maciel, Cristiano, Patricia Cristiane de Souza, José 
Viterbo, Fabiana Freitas Mendes, and Amal El Fallah 
Seghrouchni. "A Multi-agent Architecture to Support 
Ubiquitous Applications in Smart Environments." In 
Agent Technology for Intelligent Mobile Services and 
Smart Societies, pp. 106-116. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 
2015. 
[7] 
Gerrard, Claire E., John McCall, Christopher Macleod, 
and George M. Coghill. "Applications and design of 
cooperative multi-agent ARN-based systems." Soft 
Computing (2015): 1-14. 
[8] 
Li, Ni, Xiang Li, Yuzhong Shen, Zhuming Bi, and 
Minghui Sun. "Risk assessment model based on 
multi-agent systems for complex product design." 
Information Systems Frontiers 17, no. 2 (2015): 363-385. 
[9] 
Davoodi, Mohammad Reza, Khashayar Khorasani, Heidar 
Ali Talebi, and Hamid Reza Momeni. "Distributed fault 
detection and isolation filter design for a network of 
heterogeneous multiagent systems." Control Systems 
Technology, IEEE Transactions on 22, no. 3 (2014): 
1061-1069. 
[10] Wang, Yannan, Yuning Song, and Frank Lewis. "Robust 
Adaptive Fault-tolerant Control of Multi-agent Systems 
with Uncertain Non-identical Dynamics and Undetectable 
Actuation Failures." (2015). 
[11] Kumar, Sanjeev, and Philip R. Cohen. "Towards 
fault-tolerant 
multi-agent 
system 
architecture." 
Proceedings of the fourth international conference on 
Autonomous agents. ACM, 2000. 
[12] Marin, Olivier, Pierre Sens, Jean-Pierre Briot, and Zahia 
Guessoum. "Towards adaptive fault tolerance for 
distributed multi-agent systems." In Proceedings of 
ERSADS, pp. 195-201. 2001. 
[13] Almeida, Alessandro, Jean-Pierre Briot, Samir Aknine, 
Zahia Guessoum, and Olivier Marin. "Towards autonomic 
fault-tolerant multi-agent systems." In The 2nd Latin 
American 
Autonomic 
Computing 
Symposium 
(LAACS’2007), Petropolis, RJ, Brésil. 2007. 
[14] Khan, Zaheer Abbas, Salman Shahid, H. Farooq Ahmad, 
Arshad 
Ali, 
and 
Hiroki 
Suguri. 
"Decentralized 
architecture for fault tolerant multi agent system." In 
Autonomous Decentralized Systems, 2005. ISADS 2005. 
Proceedings, pp. 167-174. IEEE, 2005. 
[15] Alessandro de Luna Almeida , Samir Aknine , Jean-Pierre 
Briot , Jacques Malenfant, Plan-based replication for 
fault-tolerant multi-agent systems, Proceedings of the 
20th international conference on Parallel and distributed 
processing, p.347-347, April 25-29, 2006, Rhodes Island, 
Greece. 
[16] Singh, Aarti, Dimple Juneja, and A. K. Sharma. "Adaptive 
and automated fault-tolerance for multi-agent systems." In 
Computer Science and Automation Engineering (CSAE), 
2011 IEEE International Conference on, vol. 1, pp. 53-57. 
IEEE, 2011. 
[17] Koppensteiner, 
Gottfried, Munir Merdan, 
Wilfried 
Lepuschitz, and Ingo Hegny. "Hybrid based approach for 
fault tolrance in a multi-agent system." In Advanced 
Intelligent Mechatronics, 2009. AIM 2009. IEEE/ASME 
International Conference on, pp. 679-684. IEEE, 2009. 
[18] Bora, Sebnem, and Oguz Dikenelli. "On the choice of   
sampling rates in a fault-tolerant multi-agent system." In 
2012 International Symposium on Innovations in 
Intelligent Systems and Applications. 2012. 
[19] Mirian, Maryam S., Majid Nili Ahmadabadi, and 
Zainalabedm Navabi. "A decision-making based approach 
for fault-handling in multi-agent systems." InNeural 
Information Processing, 2002. ICONIP'02. Proceedings of 
the 9th International Conference on, vol. 4, pp. 1905-1909. 
IEEE, 2002. 
[20] Khalili, Mohsen, Xiaodong Zhang, Yongcan Cao, and 

48 
A Survey on Fault Tolerant Multi Agent System 
 
Copyright © 2016 MECS                      I.J. Information Technology and Computer Science, 2016, 9, 39-48 
Jonathan A. Muse. "Distributed Adaptive Fault-Tolerant 
Consensus Control of Multi-Agent Systems with Actuator 
Faults". 
 
 
 
Authors’ Profiles 
 
Yasir Arfat is currently student of M.S in 
computer science at King Abdulaziz 
University, Jeddah, Saudi Arabia. He has 
completed his bachelor degree in Software 
Engineering with Distinction (Gold Medal) 
from the University of Azad Jammu & 
Kashmir, Pakistan in 2011. His research 
interests include network security, software 
security, software agent systems and big data, high performance 
computing. 
 
 
Fathy E. Eassa received his B.Sc degree in 
electronics and electrical communication 
engineering from Cairo University, Egypt in 
1978 and the M.Sc. degree in computers and 
Systems 
engineering 
from 
Al 
Azhar 
University, Cairo, Egypt in 1984, and Ph.D 
degree 
in 
computers 
and 
systems 
engineering from Al-Azhar University, 
Cairo, Egypt with joint supervision with University of Colorado, 
U.S.A, in 1989. He is a full professor with computer Science dept, 
Faculty of Computing and Information technology, King Abdul 
Aziz University, Saudi Arabia. His research interests include 
agent based software engineering, cloud computing, software 
engineering, big data, distributed systems, exascale system 
testing. 
 
 
 
How to cite this paper: Yasir Arfat, Fathy Elbouraey Eassa, "A 
Survey on Fault Tolerant Multi Agent System", International 
Journal of Information Technology and Computer Science 
(IJITCS), 
Vol.8, 
No.9, 
pp.39-48, 
2016. 
DOI: 
10.5815/ijitcs.2016.09.06 
 
