Towards Robust Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning
Aritra Mitra
North Carolina State University
amitra2@ncsu.edu
Abstract
Stochastic gradient descent (SGD) is at the heart of large-
scale distributed machine learning paradigms such as feder-
ated learning (FL). In these applications, the task of train-
ing high-dimensional weight vectors is distributed among
several workers that exchange information over networks
of limited bandwidth. While parallelization at such an im-
mense scale helps to reduce the computational burden, it
creates several other challenges: delays, asynchrony, and
most importantly, a significant communication bottleneck.
The popularity and success of SGD can be attributed in no
small part to the fact that it is extremely robust to such de-
viations from ideal operating conditions. Inspired by these
findings, we ask: Are common reinforcement learning (RL)
algorithms also robust to similar structured perturbations?
Perhaps surprisingly, despite the recent surge of interest in
multi-agent/federated RL, almost nothing is known about
the above question.
To begin to fill this void, we study one of the simplest
tasks in reinforcement learning, that of policy evaluation
using the classical temporal difference (TD) learning algo-
rithm with linear function approximation. In particular, we
study variants of TD learning with perturbed update direc-
tions, where the perturbation is caused due to (i) a general
compression operator; and (ii) arbitrary (but bounded) time-
varying delays. For these settings, our main results can be
summarized as follows.
• Result 1. We prove that compressed TD algorithms, cou-
pled with an error-feedback mechanism used widely in
optimization, exhibit the same non-asymptotic theoreti-
cal guarantees as their SGD counterparts (Mitra, Pappas,
and Hassani 2023).
• Result 2. We prove that for multi-agent TD learning, one
can achieve linear convergence speedups with respect to
the number of agents while communicating just ˜O(1) bits
per iteration (Mitra, Pappas, and Hassani 2023).
• Result 3. In (Dal Fabbro, Mitra, and Pappas 2023), we
further extend our above analyses to account for the pres-
ence of lossy, packet-dropping channels in the context of
federated TD learning.
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
• Result 4. Finally, we provide a comprehensive analysis
of the effect of delays on the finite-time performance of
TD learning algorithms, and propose delay-adaptive vari-
ants that provably improve performance relative to the
vanilla delayed algorithms (Adibi et al. 2024).
Arriving at the above results is non-trivial, since unlike
the key data-independence assumption prevalent in super-
vised learning, the data in RL exhibits time correlations.
Nonetheless, we show that our techniques are not just lim-
ited to TD learning, but rather extend seamlessly to a much
broader class of stochastic approximation algorithms driven
by Markovian noise (including variants of Q-learning). The
overarching message conveyed by our work is the following:
iterative RL algorithms can be just as robust to structured
perturbations as their optimization counterparts.
References
Adibi, A.; Dal Fabbro, N.; Schenato, L.; Kulkarni, S.; Poor,
H. V.; Pappas, G. J.; Hassani, H.; and Mitra, A. 2024.
Stochastic Approximation with Delayed Updates: Finite-
Time Rates under Markovian Sampling.
In International
Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics. PMLR.
Dal Fabbro, N.; Mitra, A.; and Pappas, G. J. 2023. Feder-
ated TD Learning over Finite-Rate Erasure Channels: Linear
Speedup under Markovian Sampling. IEEE Control Systems
Letters.
Mitra, A.; Pappas, G. J.; and Hassani, H. 2023.
Tempo-
ral Difference Learning with Compressed Updates: Error-
Feedback meets Reinforcement Learning.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2301.00944.
AAAI Spring Symposium Series (SSS-24)
308
