GOV-REK: Governed Reward Engineering Kernels for Designing Robust
Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning Systems
Ashish Rana 1, Michael Oesterle 1, and Jannik Brinkmann 1
1 Institute for Enterprise Systems, University of Mannheim, Germany
ashish.rana@students.uni-mannheim.de
michael.oesterle@uni-mannheim.de
jannik.brinkmann@uni-mannheim.de
Abstract
For multi-agent reinforcement learning systems (MARLS),
the problem formulation generally involves investing mas-
sive reward engineering effort specific to a given problem.
However, this effort often cannot be translated to other prob-
lems; worse, it gets wasted when system dynamics change
drastically. This problem is further exacerbated in sparse
reward scenarios, where a meaningful heuristic can assist in
the policy convergence task. We propose GOVerned Reward
Engineering Kernels (GOV-REK), which dynamically assign
reward distributions to agents in MARLS during its learning
stage. We also introduce governance kernels, which exploit
the underlying structure in either state or joint action space for
assigning meaningful agent reward distributions. During the
agent learning stage, it iteratively explores different reward
distribution configurations with a Hyperband-like algorithm
to learn ideal agent reward models in a problem-agnostic
manner. Our experiments demonstrate that our meaningful
reward priors robustly jumpstart the learning process for
effectively learning different MARL problems.
Keywords:
Cooperative
Multi-Agent
Systems,
Sparse
Reinforcement
Learning,
Robust
Multi-Agent
Systems,
Reward Shaping
Introduction
Interactions formulated in MARLS are more intricate to learn
for complicated scenarios at increasing scales and large num-
bers of agents [43, 21]. This problem is significantly exacer-
bated in multi-agent sparse scenarios as agent solution trajec-
tories explode exponentially at large scales, and the reward
signals are not dense enough to assist the learning process
[18, 32]. Many approaches have previously explored design-
ing reward systems for single-agent and multi-agent settings
[38, 19], either by exploiting domain knowledge or utiliz-
ing imitation learning [12, 23] and ethic-based shaping learn-
ing novelties [46]. However, the reward engineering effort
is problem-specific and often does not generalize to other
MARL problems [11, 13, 33]. Hence, defining effective and
robust reward signals for agents in MARL tasks in an auto-
mated and problem-agnostic manner is a challenging prob-
lem.
Previously, architectural novelties introduced in Agent
Temporal Attention (ATA) [47], Random Network Distilla-
tion (RND) [14], Never Give Up (NGU) [2], and Shared
Extended Abstract accepted in the 23rd International Conference on
Autonomous Agents and Multi-Agent Systems (AAMAS 2024)
Figure 1: The systematic reward configuration exploration
with exponentially increasing training timestep budgets for
learning.
Experience Actor-Critic (SEAC) [16] methods have success-
fully improved the learning behavior in reinforcement learn-
ing (RL) systems against sparse problems. However, these ap-
proaches improve sample efficiency by introducing novelties
like attention, curiosity, and experience sharing as part of the
learning process rather than directly influencing agent moti-
vations. Our approach proposes an intermediary governance
layer between agents and the environment, which directly in-
centivizes agents with additional rewards selected in an auto-
mated manner to improve the baseline RL algorithms. In our
proposed approach, we define ‘governance kernels’ for each
agent, which are the reward distribution signals that gener-
ate similar additional rewards for similar states or joint ac-
tions depending on the MARL problem. Also, for a plethora
of machine learning (ML) and deep learning (DL) use cases,
the hyperparameter optimization (HPO) algorithms [8] like
Successive Halving (SH) and Hyperband [29] in a problem-
agnostic manner have consistently found exemplary hyperpa-
rameter configurations [48, 7]. Similarly, our proposed GOV-
REK framework finds suitable reward models for agents by
searching over different governance kernel configurations it-
eratively, where a repeated Hyperband-like algorithm gener-
ates the search plan to learn ideal governance kernels. Fur-
ther, the governance kernels are used in the GOV-REK frame-
work as fundamental modules that can be superimposed and
mutated across different model training rounds to incentivize
agent cooperation. Figure 1 highlights our algorithm quali-
tatively, which executes for four rounds of SH and succes-
sively prunes out relatively worst reward configurations by
factor η=3. Further, as the round increases, the budget for
arXiv:2404.01131v2  [cs.MA]  14 Apr 2024

G
A1
P
A2
(0,0)
(4,4)
G
A1
P
A2
(0,0)
(4,4)
(0,0)
(4,4)
P/G
A1
(0,0)
(4,4)
A2
G
A1
A1
A2
(0,0)
(4,4)
G
P
(0,0)
(4,4)
A1
A2
A1
A1
2D Grid Environment
B.i Soft Cooperation Constraint: Exploring 
only nearby regions for high reward signals
B.ii No Cooperation Constraint: Exploiting the 
domain knowledge rewards for goal completion
C.i Agent A1 encouraged to drop package P near agent A2, and not 
aim for goal G, post that agent A2 drops the package at goal G
C.ii Agent A1 has many paths to drop package P at goal G, A2 not used 
, and in resource constrained setting agent A1 or A2 fails to deliver P
A1’s two paths to G with P
A1’s two paths to G with P
A1 drops P near A2
A2 drops P at G
(0,0)
(4,4)
(0,0)
(4,4)
A.ii Multi-objective 
Reward Shaping (MORS)
A.i GOV-REK Approach
Environment
Governance
Agents
Agents
Policy
GOV-REK
{S, R}
{S, R՛}
R՛ = R + G
G: Updates
Environment
Agents
Agents
MORS
{S, R՛}
R՛ = R + F
Policy
{S, R}
F: Fixed
Figure 2: The functional description of the governance layer for the sparse package delivery cooperative MARL problem.
each learning model increases exponentially by η=3 factor
during successive rounds. This increasing budget produces
models with higher fidelities with each successive round with
better configurations, and we also mutate a fraction of our
selected best configurations.
Further Figure 2 demonstrates the functional working of
the governance layer for the sparse package delivery prob-
lem, where the agent-specific reward is altered to Ri to R´i
by radial governance kernels. Our proposed governance does
not change state Si and action Ai options for the agents, but the
policy that chooses state Si and action Ai might change with
the newly added rewards. For benchmarking we also high-
light a comparative approach, Multi-Objective Reward Shap-
ing (MORS), which assigns manually designed dense rewards
for every subtask completion, like package exchange between
agents, and proceeding closer toward the goal with dense di-
rectional reward gradients by exploiting domain knowledge
[13]. This governance layer is aware of all the rewards the
agents receive under a complete or partial observability set-
ting. The governance coordinator exclusively influences each
agent through additional agent-specific reward signals, but in-
dividual agent entities cannot directly change the governance-
defined rewards. For the system to achieve its shared objec-
tive, the governance evolves its reward distribution for agents
based on changing agent behavior during learning, where the
GOV-REK search plan executes different models with differ-
ent governance kernel configurations. The governance kernel
selection criteria are flexible; it can either be a single objec-
tive, like maximizing rewards, or a multi-objective, like max-
imizing rewards and minimizing episode lengths.
Our first contribution is the inception of a dynamic in-
ductive bias to explore topologically similar state or joint-
action spaces for incentivizing cooperation amongst agents
in MARLS. Second, our proposed GOV-REK framework’s
algorithm learns ideal agent reward models by conducting
an iterative search over our proposed problem-agostic reward
distributions. Further, we also demonstrate that our proposed
method successfully applies to different MARL problem task
configurations in an automated manner.
Related Work
Defining a good MARL goal is a challenging objective, where
expected agent rewards need to be jointly maximized in a
completely observable or partially observable setting. The de-
fined rewards for a given goal must stabilize the agent’s learn-
ing behavior while adapting to changing dynamics in the en-
vironment. The stability convergence requirement ensures the
stationary policy convergence, and the adaptability constraint
ensures no performance detriment with evolving policies of
other agents, provided agents are rational [10, 15]. Further,
for training MARLS, the Centralized Training Centralized
Execution (CTCE) paradigm optimizes the joint policy for
agents together, and the Centralized Training Decentralized
Execution (CTDE) paradigm agents maintain separate poli-
cies but exchange information during training [50, 27, 21]. In
this study, we train our MARLS with CTCE in a fully ob-
servable setting and CTDE in a partially observable setting
against two different MARL problems to quantify the scal-
ability and adaptability performance aspects. Previously, ar-
chitectures utilizing additional novelties like imitation-based
learning [42, 11], curiosity-driven learning [5, 40], curricu-
lum learning [3], self- or temporal-attention [30, 31], and evo-
lutionary learning [36] have shown efficacy for a wide range
of RL problems. With our proposed GOV-REK framework,
we focus on improving the performance of existing baseline
algorithms with an additional coordinating governance layer
that primarily alters agent incentives to achieve convergence.
For defining meaningful agent motivation, reward-shaping
has been widely studied in the past, where this approach has
proven its efficacy for achieving faster convergence [24, 45].
Also, incorporating other novel mechanisms, like learning
ethical human behavior demonstrations [46], multi-objective

Figure 3: The sequence of execution and learning steps in GMAS and GOV-REK approaches.
reward shaping (MORS) [13], additional rewards for sub-goal
completion [28], and context-sensitive rewards for agents
[11], have shown further improvements. However, reward-
shaping agents are often susceptible to falling under continu-
ous positive reward cycle traps, especially for sparse environ-
ments where additional rewards can dominate the accurate
underlying reward model. Formally, the reward function for
the underlying Markov Decision Process (MDP) can be mod-
ified with the relation R′ = R + F, where F(s, s, s′) is the
additional transition reward model, and ft is defined analo-
gously to rt in a temporal setting. The Potential Based Re-
ward Shaping (PBRS) maintains a potential function Φ : S
→R is a necessary and sufficient constraint designed for
policy invariance which applies to MARLS as well [20, 19].
This relation can further be modified to incorporate the tem-
poral element given by F(s, t, s′, t′) = γΦ(s′, t′) −Φ(s, t),
where γ denotes the discount factor. Furthermore, our GOV-
REK approach restricts all our agent solution trajectories to
always satisfy PBRS constraints by using only normalized
reward distributions as additional reward signals.
The task of finding optimal strategies or policies in MARL
systems is still an open challenge [49]. To mitigate this prob-
lem, researchers have proposed a paradigm where agents are
provided with assistive information for learning. Approaches,
like Environment-Mediated Multi-Agent Systems (EMMAS)
[44], Electronic Institutions (EI) [25], and Normative Multi-
Agent Systems (NorMAS) [17, 37] generally employ a re-
strictive strategy to limit original solution policy space for
empirically achieving faster convergence. Further, the Au-
tonomic Electronic Institutions (AEI) approach dynamically
evolves these constraints to achieve even faster convergence
[9]. As shown in Figure 3, the Governed Multi-Agent Sys-
tem (GMAS) approach queries every execution step to obtain
permissible actions, and the learning happens between those
steps [39]. Also, in each learning step, the governance opti-
mizes its learning policy for maximizing the system objec-
tive while evolving the action-space constraints. The black-
box ANN agents also update their policies at each learning
step, where the agents are not part of the governance. All
the above-discussed approaches strictly constrain the agent
action spaces, which might be suboptimal when a massive
exploration of the joint state-action space is needed, like in
sparse reward problems. However, with our proposed ap-
proach, the additional reward signals introduce only soft
constraints on agent exploration behavior, which prohibits
strictly restricting the exploration capacity of agents. Sec-
ond, our reward models are evolved in a more stable manner,
where only better reward models are selected after each round
of significant model training as highlighted in Figure 3.
The non-parametric approaches like Gaussian Process Re-
gression (GPR) use Gaussian kernel priors to perform the re-
gression task. Also, the kernel’s choice determines the GP
model’s generalization properties in the GPR modeling task
[22]. Here, we also focus on defining meaningful prior re-
ward distribution for agents for incentivizing agent coopera-
tion behavior in sparse scenarios. Also, HPO methods have
proved highly effective for finding suitable hyperparameter
configurations of prediction and modeling problems [8]. For
example, SH explores the hyperparameter space from low fi-
delity configurations with a lower training budget first, and
with each increasing round, doubles the training budget by
removing underperforming configurations [29]. With increas-
ing rounds, half of the active configurations with more enor-
mous losses are eliminated, and their budget is equally as-
signed to the existing configurations. Further, the Hyper-
band algorithm carries out multiple SH rounds across parallel
brackets to train a variety of hyperparameter configurations
with different training budgets to explore more configurations
systematically in a problem-agnostic manner [29]. Based on
our learnings from Hyperband’s iterative exploration method-
ology, we also iterate over different governance kernels in a
problem-agnostic manner in our proposed approach using a
repeated Hyperband-based search.
Approach Formulation
Computationally, optimizing the joint MARL policy while
parallelly searching for ideal reward models for agents is
practically infeasible for complex scenarios. We utilize the
similarities in state and joint-action spaces to define simplis-
tic reward model distributions as a function of spatial topol-
ogy in the MARL problem tasks. Hence, simplistic reward
models denoted as governance kernels are defined only based
on the geometric similarities in the state or joint action spaces
but not on state-action transitions.
Governance Kernels
The generalization of MDP formulation for RL tasks is the
stochastic game (SG) formulation in MARL settings, where
it is formally defined by the tuple < S, A1, ..., An, f, R1,
..., Rn > [4]. For n agents, S represents a discrete set of
states, Ai ∈{1, ..., n } represents the discrete action set.
The discrete actions are chosen from the discrete values range
of k actions, which further generates the joint action space
A = A1× ... ×An. The function f: S ×A× S represents the
state transition probability, and reward functions for agents
Ri ∈{1, ..., n } are expressed as Ri : S ×A× S →R. Fur-

+
gA1
gA2
g1
g՛A2
g՛A1
a.) Example of superpositioning 
different kernels for MARL agents
Hyperboloid Kernel
Rotated Kernel Variant
{rX, rY, rZ}:
{𝛱/4, 0, 𝛱/4}
Rotation Axes
b.) Example of problem adaptability 
features in governance kernels
agent kernels
global kernels
superimposed 
agent  kernels
Figure 4: The different ways in which different governance kernels are superimposable and adaptable as agent-specific and agent-
agnostic reward distributions.
ther, the individual agent policies πi: S ×A →[0,1] together
form the joint policy π, and POSG is a more generalized ver-
sion of SG where the underlying states are unknown. MARL
algorithms can be implemented on static games (stateless)
like the social-dilemma problem where the state set S = ϕ and
reward only depends on the joint actions Ri : A →R [34].
Also, MARL algorithms apply to the stage games where S ̸=
ϕ. Our experiments demonstrate the utility of defining sim-
plistic reward models that exploit geometrical spatial prop-
erties in state space in stage games and joint-action space in
static games.
gi = σ2κ(sai, s′
ai) + ξ; G = σ2κ(s, s′) + ξ;
(1)
For defining governance kernels, which are the simplified
reward models proposed as part of the GOV-REK frame-
work, we assume that Ea

R(s, a, s′)

→R′(s, s′) holds.
This exploration expectation assumption means that the un-
derlying learning algorithm is highly curious to select diverse
actions, where all the relevant solution trajectories between
the state-action transition pairs are explored. Hence, math-
ematically, we take an expectation with respect to the ex-
plored actions from the solution trajectories to define our re-
ward models only as a function of state similarity, and we
extend our results to joint-action spaces as well. The per-
formance of our solution directly depends on the enhance-
ment provided by the governance kernel rewards GR for sam-
pling all relevant solution trajectories with additional assis-
tance from the learning algorithm. Nevertheless, it allows us
to define governance kernels independent of agent transitions,
and this is expressed by the relations r′
i = ri+ gr,i and R′ =
R+ Gr for agent-specific and agent-agnostic kernels respec-
tively. The agent-specific kernels are defined considering the
initial agent’s spatial locations, whereas the agent-agnostic
kernels are independent of the agent’s initial location. There-
fore, the convergence for MARL tasks is accelerated with
suitable governance kernel priors and high exploration cu-
riosity. In its generalized mathematical form, we express our
governance kernels with the equation 1 as agent-specific and
agent-agnostic non-parametric variations, respectively. Here,
the kernel function is represented by κ, σ upscales or down-
scales function values, (sai, s′
ai) or (s, s′) quantifies the
magnitude variation between agent-specific or agent-agnostic
states, and ξ represents the noise in the kernel function.
Conceptually, kernels are widely used in GPR with Gaus-
sian kernels to generate model function estimates, and the
non-parametric Gaussian kernels are usable in modeling com-
plex functions for prediction tasks [22]. Also, similar to Gaus-
sian kernels, these governance kernels can be superimposed
over one another to generate even more complex reward mod-
els. Table 1 highlights some sample governance kernels that
resemble popular Gaussian kernels, where the radial scale,
periodicity, and magnitude are tunable for these kernels. The
governance kernels are building blocks of the GOV-REK
framework, which generates problem-agnostic reward mod-
els. It further provides orientation adaptability with super-
imposition capabilities to define spatially flexible and com-
plex reward models as highlighted in Figure 4. To extend
the package delivery problem into a 3D environment with
drones, we use another set of governance kernels with vol-
umetric surfaces and conical sections, providing easy inter-
pretability [26, 6]. Mathematically, the formal definitions of
some sample surface governance kernels are provided in Ta-
ble 1. The usage of these geometrical surfaces further high-
lights the simplicity of these kernels and their extensibility
to non-Guassian governance kernels. Further, we also assign
similar governance kernels to joint-action spaces in the re-
ward payoff matrix for an extension to static games, which are
defined without explicit states. For non-spatial problems, like
the social dilemma problems, we demonstrate that their joint
action reward payoff matrix also consists of spatial trends,
as shown in Figure 5. Specifically from Figure 5, we ob-
serve that a periodic governance kernel with a specific peri-
odicity superimposed with a directional gradient governance
kernel can further encourage agents to cooperate. Generally,
stage SGs and static SGs enclose a geometric state space or
joint-action space representation property. Furthermore, the
proposed governance kernels are applied over this geomet-
ric topology to bias the agent behavior to assist the learning
algorithm.
The GOV-REK Framework
The GOV-REK framework uses repeated Hyperband execu-
tions and iteratively manipulates governance kernel config-
urations to find suitable agent reward models. For imposing
PBRS consistency constraints, we normalize all the reward
values associated with each state or joint-action element. It
is done by dividing each scaler reward element by the sum of
total additional rewards added by that governance kernel mul-
tiplied by the number of agents. The pseudocode algorithm
1, highlights our proposed methodology of repeated execu-
tion of Hyperband-like Nr rounds, where T represents the
total SH training bracket budget. The total budgets stores
decreasing SH bracket budgets for repeated Hyperband round
execution, η represents the multiplication factor which in-
creases the training budget and decreases the number of con-
figurations after each SH round. In algorithm 1, the first train-

Table 1: The mathematical formulation of common Gaussian kernels and 3D-surface functions as sample governance kernels for
2D and 3D spatial MARL tasks respectively.
Governance Kernels for 2D spaces
Governance Kernels for 3D spaces
Name
Equation
Kernel
Name
Equation
Kernel
Linear Kernel
σ2(x −c)(x′ −c)
Diagonal Kernel
x = y = z
Periodic Kernel
σ2 exp

−2sin2(π|x−x′|2/p)
l2

Ellipsoid Kernel
x2
a2 + y2
b2 + z2
c2 = 1
Squared Exponential
σ2 exp

−(x−x′)2
2l2

Hyperboloid Kernel
x2
a2 + y2
b2 −z2
c2 = 1
ing loop defines the number of Hyperband-like round rep-
etitions, and in the later Hyperband-like rounds, the selected
best kernels from each SH bracket are mutated with the factor
m = .5. Further, the second training loop defines the bracket
training budget R, maximum brackets in current round smax,
and total Hyperband plan budget B encompassing multiple
SH brackets.
Algorithm 1: Algorithm pseudocode for the GOV-REK
framework
Input : T, Nr, η, tk
Set : total budgets = reverse sort([T ×
i
Nr in (Nr)])
Set : global top conf setgov = []
for R in total budgets do
Set : smax = ⌊logη(R)⌋, B = (smax + 1)R
Set : round top conf setgov = []
for s ∈{smax, smax −1, ..., 1, 0} do
Set : ngov = ⌈B
R
ηs
s+1⌉; rgov = Rη−s;
Set : bracket conf setgov = []
get conf setgov = get governance kernels(ngov)
for j ∈{0, ..., s} do
Set : ngov,j = ⌊ngov×η−j⌋; rgov,j = rgov×ηi
L = {get trained model metrics(
: confgov, rgov,j)
: ∈conf setgov}
bracket conf setgov.add(
top configs(tk, L, m = .5, s = .5))
end for
round top conf setgov.add(
top configs(tk, bracket conf setgov, L))
end for
global top conf setgov.add(
top configs(tk, round conf setgov, L))
end for
Return: global top conf setgov trained models
Finally, the last training loop defines the different gover-
nance kernel configurations and their corresponding budgets
for the SH bracket. Furthermore, after the parallel execution
of multiple SH rounds across different brackets, the top gov-
ernance kernels are selected. These best-performing gover-
nance kernels with the best accumulated average reward and
minimum average episode length values are passed to later
rounds. Further, they are genetically mutated and superim-
posed with other governance kernels with mutation proba-
bility factor m = .5 and superimposition probability factor
s = .5, respectively. The total accumulated reward for the
governed MARL includes additional governance kernel re-
wards for all agents. Also, the merged kernels are normalized
again to avoid violating PBRS constraints after governance
kernel superimposition. If the mutated or superimposed gov-
ernance kernels decrease the model performance objectives,
the previous top-performing kernels for agents get selected
by default.
Experiments
In our experimentation, we test the comparative performance,
robustness, and scalability of the GOV-REK framework on a
2D-grid road and 3D-grid drone environment in a fully ob-
servable CTCE setting. Further, to test the efficacy and adapt-
ability of our approach, we extend our proposed GOV-REK
framework onto the social dilemma problem in a partially
observable CTDE setting. Also, for the spatial package de-
livery task, the governance kernels are defined over the state
space, and contrastively, for the non-spatial social dilemma
problem, the governance kernels are defined over the joint-
action space. For the package delivery problem, effectively,
both resource constraint agents must cooperate to deliver a
package to the goal location to receive the only goal reward.
Whereas in the social dilemma problem, we define two sce-
narios, where partial cooperation amongst agents yields par-
tial rewards in the first scenario, and in the second scenario,
only complete cooperation amongst the agents yields the only
cooperation reward. The proposed governance layer alters
the net reward for the system for the training and inference
stages. Also, the new average expected reward includes the
additional reward provided by the agent governance kernels.
We select the baseline Proximal Policy Optimization
(PPO) implementations with default hyperparameters from
Stable Baselines3 [41] and RLlib [35] packages for CTCE
and CTDE training respectively. Further, each of the learn-
ing curves for our experiment task results from the average
of five different executions having different random seeds,
and 95 % confidence interval ranges are also plotted to quan-
tify the performance uncertainty. Our execution of the GOV-
REK plan demonstrates that the superimposition of agent-
specific squared exponential and agent-agnostic linear gov-

(0,0)
(1,1)
(0,0)
(1,1)
(0,2)
(1,3)
a.) 2-Players
b.) 3-Players
{0,0}
{1,1}
{0,1}
{1,0}
{0,0,0}
{0,1,1}
{0,0,1}
{0,1,0}
{1,0,0}
{1,1,1}
{1,0,1}
{1,1,0}
Current 2 Player
Payoff Matrix
Mirrors
Along Y-Axis
with New Action
Along X-Axis
with New Action
a.i) Base Kernel 
for Governance 
b.i) Periodic Kernel for 
Governance (p=2)
Current 3 Player
Payoff Matrix
Mirrors
Y
X
g i
g i
P
(0,0)
(1,1)
X
Y
g i
g i
P
Important Note
1. The governance kernel has 
period p=2 along X- and Y-axis.
2. And, the reward magnitude also 
increases along X- and Y-axis.
(0,0)
(1,3)
(0,0)
(1,1)
(0,2)
(1,3)
(2,0)
(3,1)
(2,2)
(3,3)
c.) 4-Players
Along Y-Axis
with New Action
Current N Player
Payoff Matrix
Mirrors
d.) N-Players
(2k,2k+2)
(2k,2k)
(2k+2,2k)
(2k+2,2k+2)
Figure 5: The increasing periodic governance kernel configuration for the non-spatial social dilemma problems.
ernance kernels works best for the 5×5 2D-grid road setting.
Similarly, for the grid drone environment, a combination of
agent-agnostic hyperboloid and diagonal surface governance
kernels works best for the 3 × 3 3D-grid drone setting. Fi-
nally, for the social dilemma problem, a combination of lin-
ear and periodic governance kernels progressively directs the
agents toward higher cooperation rates. In our experimenta-
tion tasks, we analyze the impact of random perturbations,
increasing scale and complexity, and symmetry in coopera-
tion contributions for the governance kernels selected by the
GOV-REK framework.
Robustness Analysis
The I and II subfigures in Figure 8 demonstrate the robust-
ness of the GOV-REK framework against randomized per-
turbations in environment configurations and solution trajec-
tory blocker objects. We observe that the governed MARLS
trained for 120K timesteps are generally robust to an increas-
ing number of blocker objects. However, the average episode
length increases as the number of blockers increases. Fur-
ther, relatively larger average episode lengths for the per-
episode randomized environments highlight non-optimal so-
lution trajectory selection behavior and slower package de-
liveries. The increased average episode length behavior is at-
tributed to agents selecting sub-optimal trajectories to tackle
the randomized behavior added by changing configurations
and blocker object locations. The selected governance kernels
by the GOV-REK framework are not optimized for chang-
ing initial and per-episode random configurations. However,
the selected governance kernels still demonstrate robustness
against these random environment perturbations.
Scalability Analysis
Theoretically, for each agent in the 2D-grid road and 3D-
grid drone environments, the number of possible solution tra-
jectories are of the factorial order given by (l + w −2)! /
(l−1)!(w−1)! and (l+w+h−3)! / (l−1)!(w−1)!(h−1)!
respectively, where w, l, and h stands for weight, length, and
height respectively. Therefore, with increasing linear scale,
the problem complexity increases in factorial complexity, and
adding the second agent further adds to the MARL task com-
plexity. Our approach, in its nascent form, is partially unable
to assist the baseline PPO algorithm in exploring diverse solu-
tion trajectories optimally, which leads to exploration expec-
tation assumption violation. To mitigate this solution trajec-
tory sampling issue, we introduce decaying governance ker-
nels that reduce the future reward value associated with the
state to the given fractional amount when an agent visits that
state. The baseline governance kernels bias the agent’s cu-
riosity to explore local regions more thoroughly, but decaying
governance kernels encourage agents to explore more global
and diverse solution trajectories.
Further, III and IV subfigures in Figure 8 demonstrate the
capabilities of the GOV-REK framework to operate on larger
10 × 10 2D-grid road and 5 × 5 3D-grid drone environ-
ments effectively. For a 2D-grid road environment, we ob-
serve that governance kernels are more effective with higher
decay rates, leading to faster convergence. Second, for a 3D-
grid drone environment, the efficiency again increases with
higher decay rates, but the average episode length reduction
is relatively less. We attribute this relative performance depre-
ciation to the simplistic nature of selected surface governance
kernels, which provides more interpretable solution trajectory
behavior but hampers the agent performance. Hence, simi-
lar to GPR, the convergence performance for a MARL task
depends on the initial population of the selected governance
kernels for agents.
Performance Analysis
To benchmark our approach’s performance, we compare its
learning behavior against the MORS approach for 120K
timesteps on 5 × 5 2D-grid road environments with fixed and
random initial position configurations with a single goal re-
ward (R = 2.5). 1 In earlier robustness and scalability ex-
periments, the second agent proceeds with a fixed delay after
the first agent starts moving. Nevertheless, for a more realis-
tic benchmarking comparison in this experiment, both agents
move together at the episode initialization. The reward model
for the MORS approach assigns manually engineered subtask
rewards like package pickups, package exchange, and pro-
ceeding closer to the goal as highlighted in Figure 2. From
Figure 7, the governed MARLS converges relatively faster
than the MORS approach, especially for randomized ini-
tial configurations. Further, the MORS approach accumulates
more reward after convergence with larger episode lengths. In
contrast, the governed MARL decreases the episode length
faster during learning and more after attaining convergence.
This behavior demonstrates that the MORS approach is more
1The experiment implementation is available at the repository:
github.com/arana-initiatives/gov-rek-marls

Figure 6: The GOV-REK experiment summary measures average reward returns and episode lengths for the governed MARLS to
quantify i.) robustness against increasing path blocker objects in 5×5 2D-grid road environments, ii.) robustness against different
randomization perturbations in 5 × 5 2D-grid road environment configurations, iii.) scalability performance with different reward
decays in 10×10 2D-grid road environments., iv.) scalability performance with different reward decays in 3×3 and 5×5 3D-grid
drone environments.
Figure 7: The comparison between the GOV-REK and MORS
approaches for a 5 × 5 size 2D-grid road environment in dif-
ferent configurations.
Figure 8: The average expected reward returns for a single
agent in homogeneous and heterogeneous agent systems for
baseline and sparse social dilemma problems.
A1
P
A2
G
T1
T2
a.)  A2C with Radial
Governance
A1
P
A2
G
T2
T1
b.)  PPO with Radial
Governance
T3
A1
P
A2
G
T2
T1
b.)  PPO with Radial
PBRS Governance
Figure 9: Different trajectories followed by governed agents
with A2C and PPO learning algorithms with governance.
prone to positive reward cycles leading to larger average
episode lengths. Hence, GOV-REK complies with the PBRS
framework and multi-faceted objective to select governance
kernels, minimizing average episode length and making it
more fault tolerant.
Non-spatial Problem Analysis
Figure 5 demonstrates the periodic geometric trend in the
joint action reward payoff matrix’s flattened topology for the
N-player social dilemma problem. To extend the applicabil-
ity of the GOV-REK framework, we apply all positive nor-
malized and zero-mean normalized governance kernels on
the above-described two different social dilemma problem
variants. In Figure 8, we report the average reward accu-
mulated in homogeneous (ravg
i
=1, rmax
i
=1) and heteroge-
neous (ravg
i
=1.5, rmax
i
=2, rmin
i
=1) scenarios with baseline
and sparse payoffs. Our experiments are carried out on a 16-
agent and 16-episode length setting, where we observe that
governed agents accumulate more rewards on average, espe-
cially with the zero-mean governance kernel. 2 In the homo-
2The experiment implementation is available at the repository:
github.com/arana-initiatives/boosting-social-dilemma-collusion

Agent Cooperation in 3X3 Size 3D Grid Drone Environment Episode
Turn Bar
Ground Plane
Width: 3
Length: 3
Height: 3
A1
A2
A2
A2
A2
A2
Ariel Planes
A1
P
A2
G
B
B
B
TA1
TA2
TA2
TA2
TA2
TA2
Agent 1: Moves the Package
Agent 2: Picks the Package
Agent 2: Delivers the Package
Turn Bar
Agent 1: Active Initially in the Episode
Agent 2: Active Mostly in the Episode
Turn: Agent 2
Turn: Agent 2
Turn: Agent 2
Turn: Agent 2
Turn: Agent 1
Turn: Agent 1
Turn: Agent 1
Turn: Agent 1
Turn: Agent 1
Height: 5
Width: 5
Turn Bar
Agent 1: Pickup and Carries Package; Agent 2: Waiting
Agent 1: Drops Package; Agent 2: Picks Package towards Goal
Agent 1: Active for the Episode First Half
Agent 2: Active for the Episode Second Half
Agent Cooperation in 5X5 Size 2D Grid Road Environment Episode
t=1
t=2
t=3
t=4
t=5
t=7
t=9
t=6
t=8
A1
P
A2
G
Figure 10: Simulation examples for the governed cooperation behavior solution trajectories in 2D-grid road and 3D-grid drone
environments for the package delivery task.
geneous setting, the additional average rewards are accounted
for by the extra reward values added by governance kernels.
However, for the heterogeneous setting, the average reward
accumulation is relatively more considerable, highlighting
the governed kernels’ better performance in relatively more
challenging settings. Further, in sparse settings, the governed
agents accumulate more rewards on average, demonstrating
our approach’s efficacy in sparse non-spatial (S = ϕ) envi-
ronments as well.
Discussion
Figure 9 qualitatively demonstrates that even at small scales,
the A2C algorithm with governance does not learn to deliver
the package but only to exchange it. Also, we observe that
even for a small 3×3 2D-grid road configurations, the agents
are susceptible to fall for positive reward loops, which the
PBRS constraint successfully handles. Also, we highlighted
the efficacy of using reward decays for the already visited
states as an effective way to increase agent curiosity regions
to sample diverse solution trajectories. For the package deliv-
ery problem, the rewards are accumulated by the whole sys-
tem. Figure 10 highlights the extent of contribution by agents
in the 2D-grid road and 3D-grid drone environments. We ob-
serve asymmetry in delivery contribution trajectories with the
soft regional constraints added by our governance layer re-
wards.
In simpler 2D-grid road environments, we observe that the
first agent contributes more in moving the package closer to-
ward the goal, whereas in complex 3D-grid drone environ-
ments, it is vice-versa. Figure 10 also highlights that the first
agent is more active for 5 × 5 2D-grid road environment,
whereas the second agent is more active for 3 × 3 3D-grid
drone environment. Further, for the social dilemma prob-
lem, the contribution is more symmetric, where all agents
earn similar average rewards owing to the CTDE training
paradigm, where each agent maintains their policies com-
pared to the single joint policy in CTCE package delivery task
training. We observe cooperation inconsistencies and sub-
optimality at larger and highly randomized configurations,
which leads to larger average episode lengths and lower aver-
age reward accumulation. However, our experiment demon-
strates that our proposed approach does indeed assist the
baseline MARL algorithms to achieve faster convergence
without any hyperparameter tuning.
Conclusion and Future Work
Our experiments demonstrate that our proposed GOV-REK
framework is robust and applies to different MARL tasks.
We demonstrate that simple additional reward model func-
tions defined by Gaussian functions and 3D-surface func-
tions practically help achieve faster convergence. This paper
shows that additional reward models can be successfully de-
fined based on state or joint-action similarities for agents in
a problem-agnostic manner, provided the PBRS and explo-
ration expectation constraint is satisfied. Further, our exper-
imentation quantifies the practical utilization of this reward
model simplification constraints for incentivizing cooperation
in sparse MARL problems.
The baseline PPO-based agents at a larger scale fail to hold
the exploration expectation assumption Ea

R(s, a, s′)

→
R′(s, s′) consistently. Therefore, experimenting with other al-
gorithms, like RND [14], NGU [2], and Agent 57 [1], can
yield better results. In contrast to our reward-shaping-based
inductive bias, approaches like NGU and ATA attempt to
learn these state similarities alongside the primary learning
problem [47]. Thus, exploring a paradigm that trades between
our rigid and simplistic reward exploration method against a
wholly fluid and complex state similarity learning method is
part of our future research effort.

References
[1] Badia, A. P.; Piot, B.; Kapturowski, S.; Sprechmann,
P.; Vitvitskyi, A.; Guo, Z. D.; and Blundell, C. 2020.
Agent57: Outperforming the atari human benchmark.
In International conference on machine learning, 507–
517. PMLR.
[2] Badia, A. P.; Sprechmann, P.; Vitvitskyi, A.; Guo, D.;
Piot, B.; Kapturowski, S.; Tieleman, O.; Arjovsky, M.;
Pritzel, A.; Bolt, A.; et al. 2020.
Never give up:
Learning directed exploration strategies. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2002.06038.
[3] Baker, B.; Kanitscheider, I.; Markov, T.; Wu, Y.; Pow-
ell, G.; McGrew, B.; and Mordatch, I. 2019. Emergent
tool use from multi-agent autocurricula. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1909.07528.
[4] Bas¸ar, T.; and Olsder, G. J. 1998. Dynamic noncooper-
ative game theory. SIAM.
[5] Bellemare, M.; Srinivasan, S.; Ostrovski, G.; Schaul, T.;
Saxton, D.; and Munos, R. 2016. Unifying count-based
exploration and intrinsic motivation. Advances in neural
information processing systems, 29.
[6] Benny, L. B. 1922.
Plane Geometry: an Account of
the More Elementary Properties of the Conic Sections:
Treated by the Methods of Coordinate Geometry and
of Modern Projective Geometry, with Applications to
Practical Drawing. Blackie and son.
[7] Bergstra, J.; and Bengio, Y. 2012.
Random search
for hyper-parameter optimization. Journal of machine
learning research, 13(2).
[8] Bischl, B.; Binder, M.; Lang, M.; Pielok, T.; Richter,
J.; Coors, S.; Thomas, J.; Ullmann, T.; Becker, M.;
Boulesteix, A.-L.; et al. 2023.
Hyperparameter opti-
mization: Foundations, algorithms, best practices, and
open challenges. Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: Data
Mining and Knowledge Discovery, 13(2): e1484.
[9] Bou, E.; L´opez-S´anchez, M.; and Rodr´ıguez-Aguilar,
J. A. 2006.
Towards self-configuration in autonomic
electronic institutions.
In International Workshop on
Coordination, Organizations, Institutions, and Norms in
Agent Systems, 229–244. Springer.
[10] Bowling, M.; and Veloso, M. 2001. Rational and con-
vergent learning in stochastic games. In International
joint conference on artificial intelligence, volume 17,
1021–1026. Citeseer.
[11] Brys, T.; Harutyunyan, A.; Suay, H. B.; Chernova, S.;
Taylor, M. E.; and Now´e, A. 2015. Reinforcement learn-
ing from demonstration through shaping.
In Twenty-
fourth international joint conference on artificial intel-
ligence.
[12] Brys, T.; Harutyunyan, A.; Taylor, M. E.; and Now´e,
A. 2015. Policy Transfer using Reward Shaping. In
AAMAS, 181–188.
[13] Brys, T.; Harutyunyan, A.; Vrancx, P.; Taylor, M. E.;
Kudenko, D.; and Now´e, A. 2014. Multi-objectivization
of reinforcement learning problems by reward shaping.
In 2014 international joint conference on neural net-
works (IJCNN), 2315–2322. IEEE.
[14] Burda, Y.; Edwards, H.; Storkey, A.; and Klimov, O.
2018.
Exploration by random network distillation.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.12894.
[15] Chalkiadakis, G. 2003. Multiagent reinforcement learn-
ing: Stochastic games with multiple learning play-
ers. Dept. of Computer Science, University of Toronto,
Canada, Tech. Rep, 25.
[16] Christianos, F.; Sch¨afer, L.; and Albrecht, S. 2020.
Shared experience actor-critic for multi-agent reinforce-
ment learning. Advances in neural information process-
ing systems, 33: 10707–10717.
[17] Conte, R.; Falcone, R.; and Sartor, G. 1999. Agents and
norms: How to fill the gap? AI & L., 7: 1.
[18] Dann, C.; and Brunskill, E. 2015. Sample complexity
of episodic fixed-horizon reinforcement learning. Ad-
vances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 28.
[19] Devlin, S.; and Kudenko, D. 2011.
Theoretical con-
siderations of potential-based reward shaping for multi-
agent systems. In The 10th International Conference on
Autonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems, 225–232.
ACM.
[20] Devlin, S. M.; and Kudenko, D. 2012.
Dynamic
potential-based reward shaping. In Proceedings of the
11th international conference on autonomous agents
and multiagent systems, 433–440. IFAAMAS.
[21] Du, W.; and Ding, S. 2021. A survey on multi-agent
deep reinforcement learning: from the perspective of
challenges and applications. Artificial Intelligence Re-
view, 54: 3215–3238.
[22] Duvenaud, D. 2014. Automatic model construction with
Gaussian processes. Ph.D. thesis, University of Cam-
bridge.
[23] Elbarbari, M.; Efthymiadis, K.; Vanderborght, B.; and
Now´e, A. 2021.
Ltlf-based reward shaping for rein-
forcement learning. In Adaptive and Learning Agents
Workshop, volume 2021.
[24] Eschmann, J. 2021.
Reward function design in re-
inforcement learning.
Reinforcement Learning Algo-
rithms: Analysis and Applications, 25–33.
[25] Esteva, M.; Rodriguez-Aguilar, J.-A.; Sierra, C.; Garcia,
P.; and Arcos, J. L. 2001. On the formal specification
of electronic institutions. In Agent Mediated Electronic
Commerce: The European AgentLink Perspective, 126–
147. Springer.
[26] Gomes, A. J.; Voiculescu, I.; Jorge, J.; Wyvill, B.; and
Galbraith, C. 2009. Implicit curves and surfaces: math-
ematics, data structures and algorithms. Springer.
[27] Gronauer, S.; and Diepold, K. 2022. Multi-agent deep
reinforcement learning: a survey. Artificial Intelligence
Review, 1–49.
[28] Harutyunyan, A.; Devlin, S.; Vrancx, P.; and Now´e,
A. 2015.
Expressing arbitrary reward functions as
potential-based advice.
In Proceedings of the AAAI
Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 29.
[29] Hutter, F.; Kotthoff, L.; and Vanschoren, J. 2019. Auto-
mated machine learning: methods, systems, challenges.
Springer Nature.
[30] Iqbal, S.; and Sha, F. 2019. Actor-attention-critic for
multi-agent reinforcement learning.
In International
conference on machine learning, 2961–2970. PMLR.

[31] Jiang, J.; and Lu, Z. 2018. Learning attentional com-
munication for multi-agent cooperation.
Advances in
neural information processing systems, 31.
[32] Jiang, N.; and Agarwal, A. 2018. Open problem: The
dependence of sample complexity lower bounds on
planning horizon. In Conference On Learning Theory,
3395–3398. PMLR.
[33] Lee, H.; Hong, J.; and Jeong, J. 2022. MARL-Based
Dual Reward Model on Segmented Actions for Multiple
Mobile Robots in Automated Warehouse Environment.
Applied Sciences, 12(9): 4703.
[34] Leibo, J. Z.; Zambaldi, V.; Lanctot, M.; Marecki, J.;
and Graepel, T. 2017. Multi-agent reinforcement learn-
ing in sequential social dilemmas.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:1702.03037.
[35] Liang, E.; Liaw, R.; Nishihara, R.; Moritz, P.; Fox, R.;
Goldberg, K.; Gonzalez, J. E.; Jordan, M. I.; and Stoica,
I. 2018. RLlib: Abstractions for Distributed Reinforce-
ment Learning. In International Conference on Machine
Learning (ICML).
[36] Long, Q.; Zhou, Z.; Gupta, A.; Fang, F.; Wu, Y.; and
Wang, X. 2020.
Evolutionary population curriculum
for scaling multi-agent reinforcement learning. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2003.10423.
[37] Neufeld, E. A. 2022. Reinforcement Learning Guided
by Provable Normative Compliance. In Rocha, A. P.;
Steels, L.; and van den Herik, H. J., eds., Proceed-
ings of the 14th International Conference on Agents
and Artificial Intelligence, ICAART 2022, Volume
3, Online Streaming, February 3-5, 2022, 444–453.
SCITEPRESS.
[38] Ng, A. Y.; Harada, D.; and Russell, S. 1999. Policy in-
variance under reward transformations: Theory and ap-
plication to reward shaping. In Icml, volume 99, 278–
287.
[39] Oesterle, M.; Bartelt, C.; L¨udtke, S.; and Stucken-
schmidt, H. 2022. Self-learning governance of black-
box multi-agent systems. In International Workshop on
Coordination, Organizations, Institutions, Norms, and
Ethics for Governance of Multi-Agent Systems, 73–91.
Springer.
[40] Ostrovski, G.; Bellemare, M. G.; Oord, A.; and Munos,
R. 2017. Count-based exploration with neural density
models. In International conference on machine learn-
ing, 2721–2730. PMLR.
[41] Raffin, A.; Hill, A.; Gleave, A.; Kanervisto, A.; Ernes-
tus, M.; and Dormann, N. 2021. Stable-Baselines3: Re-
liable Reinforcement Learning Implementations. Jour-
nal of Machine Learning Research, 22(268): 1–8.
[42] Schaal, S. 1996.
Learning from demonstration.
Ad-
vances in neural information processing systems, 9.
[43] Tuyls, K.; and Weiss, G. 2012. Multiagent learning: Ba-
sics, challenges, and prospects. Ai Magazine, 33(3): 41–
41.
[44] Weyns, D.; Brueckner, S. A.; and Demazeau, Y. 2008.
Engineering Environment-Mediated Multi-Agent Sys-
tems: International Workshop, EEMMAS 2007, Dres-
den, Germany, October 5, 2007, Selected Revised and
Invited Papers, volume 5049. Springer.
[45] Wirth, C.; Akrour, R.; Neumann, G.; F¨urnkranz, J.;
et al. 2017.
A survey of preference-based reinforce-
ment learning methods. Journal of Machine Learning
Research, 18(136): 1–46.
[46] Wu, Y.-H.; and Lin, S.-D. 2018.
A low-cost ethics
shaping approach for designing reinforcement learning
agents. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Arti-
ficial Intelligence, volume 32.
[47] Xiao, B.; Ramasubramanian, B.; and Poovendran, R.
2022. Agent-Temporal Attention for Reward Redistri-
bution in Episodic Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learn-
ing. arXiv preprint arXiv:2201.04612.
[48] Young, S. R.; Rose, D. C.; Karnowski, T. P.; Lim, S.-
H.; and Patton, R. M. 2015. Optimizing deep learning
hyper-parameters through an evolutionary algorithm. In
Proceedings of the workshop on machine learning in
high-performance computing environments, 1–5.
[49] Zhang, K.; Yang, Z.; and Bas¸ar, T. 2021. Multi-agent
reinforcement learning: A selective overview of theories
and algorithms.
Handbook of reinforcement learning
and control, 321–384.
[50] Zhao, W.; Queralta, J. P.; and Westerlund, T. 2020.
Sim-to-real transfer in deep reinforcement learning for
robotics: a survey. In 2020 IEEE symposium series on
computational intelligence (SSCI), 737–744. IEEE.
