IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SYSTEMS, MAN, AND CYBERNETICS: SYSTEMS, VOL. 55, NO. 7, JULY 2025
4957
Robust Training in Multiagent Deep Reinforcement
Learning Against Optimal Adversary
Weiran Guo
, Guanjun Liu
, Senior Member, IEEE, Ziyuan Zhou
, Graduate Student Member, IEEE,
Jiacun Wang
, Senior Member, IEEE, Ying Tang
, Senior Member, IEEE, and Miaomiao Wang
Abstract—Industry
5.0
enhances
manufacturing
ability
through efﬁcient human-machine interaction, combining human
resources and robots to complete tasks more accurately and
effectively. Artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) plays an essential role in
Industry 5.0. As a branch in AI, multiagent deep reinforcement
learning (MADRL) attracts vast attention in both academia
and industry. However, there is a gap between virtual and
physical environments in terms of how clean an observed state
is. In addition, state adversarial attacks can seriously impact the
performance of MADRL. Hence, how to improve the robustness
of MADRL algorithms is an important research topic. In this
article, we propose an optimal policy-based state adversary
attack method that would make the MADRL algorithm more
robust when it is applied in the training process of agents. Two
case studies related to Industry 5.0 and a general case study
are presented in which robustness training against the optimal
adversarial attack is tested. The MADRL algorithms involved in
the experiments include centralized training and decentralized
execution (CTDE) framework and shared experience actor-critic
(SEAC) to demonstrate the universality of our method.
Index Terms—Industry 5.0, multiagent reinforcement learning,
robustness, state-adversarial attack.
I. INTRODUCTION
W
ITH the advent and development of artiﬁcial intelli-
gence (AI), the concept of Industry 5.0 arises. One
of the main ideas of Industry 5.0 is to let machines like
UAVs [1], [2], [3] and robots carry the burden of repetitive
Received 29 May 2024; revised 23 September 2024 and 28 December
2024; accepted 6 April 2025. Date of publication 25 April 2025; date of
current version 18 June 2025. This work was supported in part by the Space
Optoelectronic Measurement and Perception Lab, Beijing Institute of Control
Engineering under Grant LabSOMP-2023-03; in part by the National Nature
Science Foundation of China under Grant 62172299 and Grant 62032019;
and in part by the Shanghai Science and Technology Innovation Action Plan
under Grant 23511100800. This article was recommended by Associate Editor
X. Xu. (Corresponding authors: Guanjun Liu; Miaomiao Wang.)
Weiran Guo, Guanjun Liu, and Ziyuan Zhou are with the School
of
Computer
Science
and
Technology,
Tongji
University,
Shanghai
201804, China (e-mail: gwr00519@tongji.edu.cn; liuguanjun@tongji.edu.cn;
ziyuanzhou@tongii.edu.cn).
Jiacun Wang is with the Department of Computer Science and Software
Engineering, Monmouth University, West Long Branch, NJ 07764 USA
(e-mail: jwang@monmouth.edu).
Ying Tang is with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering,
Rowan University, Glassboro, NJ 08028 USA (e-mail: tang@rowan.edu).
Miaomiao Wang is with the Space Optoelectronic Measurement and
Perception Lab, Beijing Institute of Control Engineering, Beijing 100190,
China (e-mail: emu_0630@163.com).
Color versions of one or more ﬁgures in this article are available at
https://doi.org/10.1109/TSMC.2025.3561276.
Digital Object Identiﬁer 10.1109/TSMC.2025.3561276
and heavy work for humans and reach the goal of human-
machine cooperation. Therefore, collaborative robots (cobots)
are regarded as one of the key technologies related to Industry
5.0 [4]. multiagent deep reinforcement learning (MADRL)
is an AI-based method that greatly contributes to robot-
related scenarios [5], [6]. It trains multiple agents in a shared
environment to take optimal actions and gain maximum
rewards.
To improve the stability of the learning process and
decrease the complexity of high-dimensional state spaces,
the centralized training with decentralized execution (CTDE)
framework is proposed, and algorithms like calculating the
overall Q value with a MIXing network (QMIX) [7] and
value decomposition networks (VDNs) [8] are developed.
However, these MADRL algorithms are complex to train in
many reward-sparse scenarios because each agent only has
access to its own experience, making it difﬁcult for rewarded
states to emerge from the training exploration process and
for the agents to be able to train actions that maximize
rewards. Christianos et al. [9] proposed a framework of shared
experience actor-critic (SEAC) to cope with the sparse reward
issues by bringing up the idea of sharing the experience among
agents.
However, MADRL is sensitive to minor changes in the
agents’ observations [10], [11]. A model trained by MADRL
performs well in the virtual environment, but putting it
into practice requires more effort. A key reason is that the
observations obtained by agents in the virtual environment
differ from those obtained by machines in the actual setting.
The sensors’ noise is the leading cause of this phenomenon. In
addition, malicious adversarial attacks can aggressively target
the agents’ observations, resulting in a signiﬁcant decrease
in the agents’ performance. Such attacks are far more potent
than random noise. For machines in the industrial sector, such
attacks can bring about severe deterioration in functionality,
signiﬁcantly affecting productivity and manufacturing safety.
There has been a lot of investigation into robust measures
in single-agent deep reinforcement learning (SADRL) [12],
[13], [14], [15], but it is not desirable to directly replicate
the experience of SADRL into MADRL. Robust training
of MADRL algorithms is of more challenges compared to
SADRL due to the following reasons.
1) MADRL has a larger state and action space than
SADRL, leading to undesired training results and caus-
ing problems such as gradient explosion or gradient
vanishing.
2168-2216 c⃝2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artiﬁcial intelligence
and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Texas at Arlington. Downloaded on June 27,2026 at 06:35:58 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

4958
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SYSTEMS, MAN, AND CYBERNETICS: SYSTEMS, VOL. 55, NO. 7, JULY 2025
2) The relationship among agents is not independent but
associated. An MADRL problem is not a simple copy-
and-paste of multiple SADRL problems, and agents’
interactions must be considered.
In this article, we focus on a robust training method that
can withstand powerful state attacks, and thus enhance the
robustness of MADRL. The main contributions of this article
are summarized as follows.
1) We
introduce
the
policy
adversarial
decentralized
partially observable Markov decision process (PA-Dec-
POMDP) to describe multiagent decision problems.
2) We propose a train-time attack framework called
multiagent
policy-directed
adversary
(MAPDA),
inspired by the test-time policy adversarial actor director
(PAAD) in SADRL [16]. During the training process,
we employ the MAPDA attack on the agents to enhance
the robustness of the models trained by the MADRL
algorithms.
3) The above MADRL robust training method is applied
to two industrial environments and one general envi-
ronment, and is compared with four baseline methods
in terms of robust performance, generalization and
performance in the no-attack state.
II. RELATED WORK
A. Robust SADRL
With the discovery of the vulnerability of SADRL to
state adversarial attacks, numerous attacks targeting SADRL
have emerged. Kos and Song [17] applied two commonly
used attacks in deep learning, namely random noise and fast
gradient sign method (FGSM) [18], to SADRL, demonstrating
the effectiveness of these attacks in SADRL. Building on
this, Tretschk et al. [19] proposed a network-based approach
using the adversarial transformer network (ATN) [20] to gen-
erate state perturbations, successfully misleading the agent’s
actions. Zhang et al. [14] introduced the alternating training
with learned adversaries (ATLA) attack framework, aiming
to minimize the agent’s rewards through state adversarial
perturbations. To address the drawback of high training
dimensionality in ATLA, Sun et al. [16] proposed PAAD,
which generates state perturbations at the policy level. These
achievements primarily focus on state adversarial attacks
against SADRL, but there is a lack of detailed discussions on
how to defend against these attacks.
In order to resist state adversarial attacks on SADRL, such
as those mentioned above, existing research has proposed a
series of defense methods. For example, Zhang et al. [13]
introduced a method of adding a regularization term to the loss
function to minimize the distance between the attacked policy
and the normal policy, ensuring that the agent does not exhibit
overly abnormal behavior after an attack. Shen et al. [21]
leveraged the smooth transitional properties of continuous
state spaces and propose training a smooth policy to enhance
robustness. Liu et al. [22] presented a novel approach that uses
only benign samples, signiﬁcantly reducing training costs and
risks. Robust SADRL has been applied in real-world trafﬁc
scenarios such as autonomous driving [23]. These studies are
speciﬁc to SADRL and have not been validated in MADRL.
B. State Adversarial Attacks on MADRL
Many studies have demonstrated the vulnerability of
MADRL against attacks. Even when only a few agents are
attacked in a small number of timesteps, the performance of
MADRL will be greatly impacted [24]. To evaluate the robust-
ness of MADRL, Pham et al. [25] presented a model-based
method that generates strong attacks. Lin et al. [11] proposed
model-based strong attacks, but they are limited to the same
category of MADRL algorithms and thus not necessarily effec-
tive in other types of algorithms (e.g., experience-sharing).
Zhou and Liu [26] used differential evolution to attack impor-
tant agents and make multiagent systems much less effective
with precision attacks. However, this work only focuses on
attacks on algorithms in the CTDE paradigm. All these works
investigate adversarial attacks on MADRLs but do not offer a
solution on how to counter the attacks.
C. Robust Training in MADRL
Han et al. [27] proposed a robust MADRL that addresses
adversarial state attacks. However, the adversary’s state and
action spaces in this method are large, leading to much
computating resources demand and no assurance of favorable
outcomes. Shi et al. [28] utilized random noise to connect
virtual and real environments. However, their method lacks the
inclusion of optimal attacks during training. Zhou et al. [29]
introduced a novel objective function and a repetitive regu-
larization technique to strengthen the defensive capabilities
of MADRL. However, the effectiveness of the regularization
method needs improvement. Additionally, the method does
not investigate novel approaches to perturbing the agents’
observations. Guo et al. [30] investigated various meth-
ods to transfer robust training techniques from SADRL to
MADRL. Although the work makes QMIX more robust, it
lacks a theoretical foundation. Yu et al. [31] proposed the
active defense multiagent communication (ADMAC) frame-
work, which speciﬁcally addresses the defense of MADRL
in communication-critical tasks. However, its generality is
limited.
To ﬁll the above research gap, we propose the MAPDA
attack framework to enhance MADRL’s robustness. Our
approach is not limited to one type of MADRL algorithm (e.g.,
CTDE-based algorithms like QMIX and VDN) or one type
of environment (e.g., reward-dense type); it can be applied to
various settings.
III. PRELIMINARY
A. State-Adversarial Dec-POMDP
Dec-POMDP [32] is a theoretical model of multiagent
systems. It describes agents that can only perceive their
observations. In reality lots of systems have such a feature
since agents typically encounter communication delays and
limitations in sensor range. They often only have access to a
fraction of the environment’s information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Texas at Arlington. Downloaded on June 27,2026 at 06:35:58 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

GUO et al.: ROBUST TRAINING IN MADRL AGAINST OPTIMAL ADVERSARY
4959
A
Dec-POMDP
can
be
deﬁned
as
⟨S, {Ai}i∈N, P, R,
{Oi}i∈N, Z, N, γ ⟩. S is the environment’s state set. The set of
agents is denoted as N = {1, . . . , n}. The joint action space
of the agents is represented as A and a ∈A represents an
immediate joint action. The action space of agent i is denoted
by Ai with the immediate action of agent i being ai ∈Ai.
P(s′|s, a) : S×A1 ×· · ·×An ×S →[0, 1] is the state transition
probability based on the state and the agents’ joint action.
O is the joint observation space and o ∈O represents an
immediate joint observation. Oi is the observation space of
agent i with oi ∈Oi as the immediate observation of agent i.
Z(s, a) : S×A1 ×· · ·×An →O1 ×· · ·×On is the observation
function. γ ∈[0, 1) is the discount factor. The global reward
function is R(s, a) : S × A1 × · · · × An →R and ri represents
the immediate reward of agent i. In the CTDE framework, all
agents share R, i.e., r1 = · · · = rn. SEAC does not adhere to
a strict Dec-POMDP. The reward function of its agents is not
required to be the same, i.e., the reward function of agent i is Ri
with the immediate reward as ri. We uniformly describe these
algorithms using Dec-POMDP, but their reward components
are different.
In this article, we introduce the state-adversarial Dec-
POMDP (SA-Dec-POMDP) where observations obtained by
the agents are perturbed. Unlike in Dec-POMDP, the obser-
vations of the agents in SA-Dec-POMDP are not clean, but
rather they are affected by perturbations. An SA-Dec-POMDP
can be described as a tuple ⟨S, {Ai}i∈N, P, R, {Oi}i∈N, Z,
{Bi}i∈M, M, N, γ ⟩. The set of victim agents is denoted as M ⊆
N, |M| = m ≤n. Bi is the set of adversarial observations
of agent i with B being the joint adversarial observation set.
The meanings of other symbols are consistent with those in
Dec-POMDP.
The set of victim agents is denoted as M ⊆
N, |M| = m ≤n. Bi In this article, we employ two typical
value-based algorithms, VDN and QMIX, as examples of our
CTDE-based algorithms. The subsequent discussion will focus
on the exposition of QMIX, VDN, and SEAC algorithms.
Each agent can only obtain a part of the entire state of the
multiagent system, so we attack the state of the multiagent
system by attacking the observations of the victim agents.
B. Centralized Training With Decentralized Execution
VDN and QMIX utilize the value function decomposition
approach during training, enabling agents to discover the
global Q-value function. When using the VDN and QMIX, it
is crucial to ensure consistency between the local and global
Q-value functions for effective collaboration among multiple
agents. This is denoted as individual-global-max (IGM)
argmaxaQglobal(τ, a) =
⎛
⎜⎝
argmaxa1 Q1
τ 1, a1
...
argmaxan Qn(τ n, an)
⎞
⎟⎠
(1)
where Qglobal is the global Q-value function evaluating the
whole multiagent system, τ
= (τ 1, . . . , τ N) is the joint
action-observation histories and τ i = (ai
0, oi
1, . . . , oi
t) is the
action-observation history of agent i containing its action and
observation at every timestep. The perturbations we apply are
limited to the observed portion of τ i. The policy πi of agent
i is obtained greedily based on its Q-value function Qi.
The mainstream cooperative MADRL algorithms, VDN and
QMIX, adhere to this framework. VDN achieves a global
Q-value by adding up local Q-values to achieve IGM
Qglobal(τ, a) =
n

i=1
Qi(τ i, ai).
(2)
QMIX assigns weights to each agent, ensuring both global
and local monotonicity while accounting for nonlinear rela-
tionships among the agents
∂Qglobal
∂Qi
≥0 ∀i ∈[1, n].
(3)
They both use the following loss function to update their
Q-value networks parameterized by ψ
L(ψ) = (y −Qglobal
ψ
(τ , s, a))2
(4)
where y = r + γ maxa′ Qglobal
ψ′
(τ ′, s′, a′), Qglobal
ψ′
(τ ′, s′, a′) is
the target Q-value network. Since we only consider adversarial
perturbations on the state, we will use o instead of τ through-
out the rest of this article for better clarity.
C. Shared Experience Actor-Critic
SEAC is designed to address the reward-sparse problem
in MADRL. It builds upon the basic policy gradient algo-
rithm REINFORCE [33]. It adopts the classical Actor-Critic
architecture, where each agent i trains its policy πθi with
parameter θi and utilizes the value network Vωi with parameter
ωi to calculate Monte Carlo returns. The policy of agent i is
trained not only using its own trajectory (on-policy) but also
incorporating the trajectories of peer agents (off-policy). This
approach utilizes importance sampling techniques to address
policy bias. The loss function of the policy of agent i is
Ji
own = −log π(ai
t|oi
t; θi)(ri
t + γ V(oi
t+1; ωi) −V(oi
t; ωi)) (5)
Ji
peer = −

j̸=i
π(aj
t|oj
t; θi)
π(aj
t|oj
t; θj)
log π(aj
t|oj
t; θi)
(rj
t + γ V(oj
t+1; ωi) −V(oj
t; ωi))
(6)
Lπ(θi) = Ji
own + βJi
peer
(7)
where Ji
own is the policy loss function for agent i’s trajectory,
and Ji
peer is the policy loss function for other agents’ trajecto-
ries. The overall policy loss function Lπ(θi) is updated at each
timestep t, and β serves as a weighting factor to balance the
contributions of the two components in the total loss. Similarly,
the value network is updated toward the following objective:
Ki
own = (V(oi
t; ωi) −(ri
t + γ V(oi
t+1; ωi)))2
(8)
Ki
peer =

j̸=i
π(aj
t|oj
t; ωi)
π(aj
t|oj
t; ωj)
(V(oj
t; ωi) −(rj
t + γ V(oj
t+1; ωi)))2 (9)
LV(ωi) = Ki
own + βKi
peer
(10)
where Ki
own is the value loss function for agent i’s trajectory
and Ki
peer is the value loss function for the trajectories of
other agents except agent i. The combination of these two
components forms the loss function LV(ωi) for the value
network. The weighting parameter β is the same as in (7).
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Texas at Arlington. Downloaded on June 27,2026 at 06:35:58 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

4960
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SYSTEMS, MAN, AND CYBERNETICS: SYSTEMS, VOL. 55, NO. 7, JULY 2025
IV. ROBUST MADRL AGAINST OPTIMAL ADVERSARY
A. Decomposition of Robust Training Process
To ensure that a model can withstand attacks of various
strengths, we maximize the worst-case reward of a multiagent
system. This is achieved by using a max-min return formula
max
π
min
˜o Eat∼π(˜ot)[
∞

t=1
γ t−1R(st, at)]
= max
π
min
˜o Eat∼π(˜ot)[
∞

t=1
γ t−1R(st, a1
t , . . . , am
t , . . . , an
t )]
(11)
where ˜o = (˜o1, ˜o2, . . . , ˜om, om+1, . . . , on), ˜oi ∈Bi, i ∈N, the
joint policy is π = (π1, π2, . . . , πn), and πi is the policy of
agent i. As shown in the above equation, we decompose a
robust training task into two parts: solving the inner minimum
problem and solving the outer maximum problem. The inner
minimum problem refers to the need for a strong attack that
effectively tempts victim agents toward actions resulting in
minimal rewards. This attack is formulated as the optimal
adversary. Our MAPDA framework solves this issue. The
outer maximum problem is addressed by incorporating the
above optimal adversary into the standard training process of
algorithms. We use this approach to enhance the robustness of
the QMIX, VDN, and SEAC, and the corresponding methods
are denoted as RoVDN, RoQMIX, and RoSEAC, respectively.
The following subsections elaborate on the solutions to the
minimum problem and the maximum problem.
B. Multiagent Optimal Adversary With Actor Director
To tackle the inner minimum problem, we translate state
attacks into policy attacks, propose the PA-Dec-POMDP
framework and provide some theoretical analysis.
1) Equivalence of State and Policy Attacks: Before intro-
ducing our MAPDA architecture, it is essential to clarify the
connection between state and policy attacks.
Property 1: In a multiagent system, the perturbation of an
agent’s observation is equivalent to the perturbation of its
policy in terms of their probability distributions over actions.
This property can be formally expressed as π(·|˜o) =
πv(·|o), where πv = (π1
v , π2
v , . . . , πm
v , πm+1, . . . , πn) repre-
sents the joint policy with perturbed policies. To explain this
property, we assume there is a state adversary function vi ∈Vi
ϵ,
where Vi
ϵ represents the state adversary function space within
an attacking budget of ϵ. This property holds true for every
oi ∈Oi of every agent i
vi(oi) = ˜oi ∈Bi
ϵ = {oi′ ∈Oi : ||oi′ −oi|| ≤ϵ}.
(12)
In this case, there exists a policy πi
v satisfying πi
v(·|oi) =
πi(·|vi(oi)) = πi(·|˜oi). From a macro perspective, the joint
policy with perturbed individual policies can be expressed as
π(·|˜o) = (π1(·|˜o1), π2(·|˜o2), . . . , πm(·|˜om), . . . , πn(·|on))
= (π1
v (·|o1), π2
v (·|o2), . . . , πm
v (·|om), . . . , πn(·|on))
= πv(·|o).
(13)
Hence, the equivalence between state attacks and policy
attacks holds for both individual agents and the entire
multiagent system. Consequently, the subsequent analysis
focuses on policies and a single agent.
A major beneﬁt of this transformation is that it reduces
the size of the perturbation space from |O| (the dimension
of agent observations) to |A| (the dimension of possible
actions), since |A| is usually smaller than |O| in MADRL.
This reduction is particularly advantageous when dealing with
high-dimensional observations (e.g., image inputs) and the
increased dimensionality in MADRL problems. By converting
state attacks into policy attacks, we signiﬁcantly decrease the
output dimension and greatly alleviate the training complexity.
2) Optimal State Adversary and Policy Adversary: Since
state and policy attacks can be mutually transformed, deter-
mining the most potent perturbation involves exploring the
relationship between optimal state and policy adversaries. To
achieve this, we deﬁne the adversarial policy set for agent i,
which aligns with its policy under adversarial observations
Ci
ϵ(πi) = {πi
v ∈i : ∃v ∈Vϵ s.t. ∀oi, πi
v(·|oi) = πi(·|vi(oi))} (14)
where i is the policy space of agent i. The elements of
Ci
ϵ(πi) ⊂i are inﬂuenced by two key factors: the attack
magnitude ϵ and the policy πi. The size of the set is
determined by ϵ, while the location of the set in policy space
is determined by πi. The optimal policy adversary πi
v∗satisﬁes
πi
v∗∈Ci
ϵ(πi). We relate it to the optimal state adversary:
Property 2: Given a ﬁxed policy πi and a set of state adver-
sary functions Vi
ϵ, an optimal state adversary vi∗minimizes
the resulting reward, leading to an optimal policy adversary
πv∗that also yields the lowest reward. The formal expressions
for this relationship are as follows:
vi∗∈argminvi∈ViϵVπi
v(oi)
(15)
πi
v∗∈argminπiv∈Ciϵ(πi)Vπi
v(oi).
(16)
These deﬁne the equivalence between the optimal state and
policy adversaries. Consequently, the task of identifying the
optimal state adversary within the space of adversarial obser-
vations Bi
ϵ can be transformed into ﬁnding the optimal policy
adversary within the space of policy adversaries Ci
ϵ(πi).
The location of the optimal policy adversary in Ci
ϵ(πi) is of
utmost importance. According to [16], in SADRL, the optimal
policy always lies at the boundary of the adversarial policy
space. By decomposing a multiagent system into individual
agents, each agent i also satisﬁes the following property.
Property 3: For a ﬁxed policy πi, there always exists an
optimal adversarial policy ˜πi at the boundary of the set of
adversarial policies. The formalization is expressed as follows:
∃˜πi ∈∂πiCi
ϵ(πi) s.t. ˜πi = πi
v∗
(17)
∂πiCi
ϵ(πi)
= {πi′ ∈Ci
ϵ(πi) : ∀oi ∈Oi, ξ > 0, ∄˙πi ∈Ci
ϵ(πi)
s.t. ˙πi(·|oi) = πi′(·|oi) + ξ(πi′(·|oi) −πi(·|oi))}. (18)
Each agent can ﬁnd the optimal adversary of the policy at the
edge of the corresponding set of adversarial policies.
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Texas at Arlington. Downloaded on June 27,2026 at 06:35:58 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

GUO et al.: ROBUST TRAINING IN MADRL AGAINST OPTIMAL ADVERSARY
4961
Fig. 1.
Attack framework of MAPDA during the training process. Speciﬁcally, it refers to the interactive process among the victim agents, adversary, and
environment at timestep t.
It may seem intuitive that the optimal joint policy adversary,
denoted as πv∗, would be a tuple comprising the optimal
adversaries of all agents. However, before hastily reaching
such a conclusion, it is crucial to demonstrate that combining
these localized optimal policy adversaries indeed results in the
optimal global policy adversary. In VDN and QMIX, we know
from (2) and (3) that the Q-value function of each agent is
positively related to the overall Q-value function
Qglobal(o, a) = Mixing(Q1(o1, a1), . . . , Qn(on, an)). (19)
In VDN, Mixing is the summation operation, while in QMIX,
it is the mixing network. In Mixing, the local and overall
Q-values satisfy (2) or (3), implying that the local optimum
is also the global optimum. In the SEAC, agents undergo
relatively independent training. This ensures that minimizing
the local value functions aligns with minimizing the global
value function. Consequently, the local and global optima are
equivalent in these three algorithms.
3) Policy-Adversarial
Dec-POMDP: We
extend
the
SA-Dec-POMDP
model
to
create
a
PA-Dec-POMDP
model, which allows us to shift the focus from state
adversaries to policy adversaries. This transformation enables
us to address the problem from a policy perspective.
More speciﬁcally, a PA-Dec-POMDP can be described as
⟨S, {Ai}i∈N, P, R, {Oi}i∈N, Z, {¯Ai}i∈N, M, N, γ ⟩. ¯A is the joint
action space of a group of adversarial agents, and ¯a ∈¯A is an
immediate joint action. ¯Ai is the action space of adversarial
agent i, and ¯ai ∈¯Ai is an immediate action of agent i. While ¯A
has the same spatial size as A, we choose m adversarial agents
responsible for attacking. The meanings of other symbols are
the same with those in SA-Dec-POMDP.
Using the PA-Dec-POMDP framework as a foundation,
we develop a multiagent actor-director attack system, namely
MAPDA. The director, denoted as f, is a policy adversary
comprising m adversarial agents. Its purpose is to identify
the action ¯a = f(o) that minimizes the reward for the victim
agents. Actor g pulls the policy along the direction of ¯a to the
furthest policy within the allowed range (i.e., the farthest edge
of Ci
ϵ) and generates perturbations ˜o = g(¯a, o) = g(f(o), o).
To establish a zero-sum game scenario between the victim
agents and the policy adversarial agents, we deﬁne ¯R(s, ¯a) : S×
¯A1 × · · · × ¯An →R as the global reward for the adversarial
agents. Additionally, the immediate reward for adversarial
agent i is ri−= −ri. The architecture of MAPDA is shown in
Fig. 1.
4) Implementation: To
implement
the
MAPDA
attack
architecture, we can choose an MADRL algorithm for the
director, such as the victim agents’ algorithm or alternative
MADRL algorithms like MAPPO [34]. For the actor, we can
generate adversarial samples using the FGSM and projected
gradient descent (PGD) [35]. These gradient-based adversarial
samples can link the policy adversary with the observations.
We utilize the FGSM as an example and deﬁne speciﬁc loss
functions to capture the relationship between the policies of
the adversarial agents and the victim agents in QMIX, VDN
and SEAC
L (at, ot, ¯at)
= J (Qglobal(ot, ·), at) −J (Qglobal(ot, ·), ¯at)
(20)
L (ai
t, oi
t, ¯ai
t) = J (πi(·|oi
t), ai
t) −J (πi(·|oi
t), ¯ai
t). (21)
In the above two equations, Qglobal(ot, ·) represents the global
Q-values for all actions corresponding to observation ot, and
πi(·|oi
t) represents the probability distribution of all actions of
agent i given observation ot. L is the loss function during
the attack, and J is a multiclassiﬁcation loss function, e.g.,
cross-entropy loss. The attack is measured at timestep t.
Equation (20) represents the implementation of MAPDA in
VDN and QMIX, while (21) represents the implementation
of MAPDA in SEAC. QMIX and VDN are both value-based
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Texas at Arlington. Downloaded on June 27,2026 at 06:35:58 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

4962
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SYSTEMS, MAN, AND CYBERNETICS: SYSTEMS, VOL. 55, NO. 7, JULY 2025
Algorithm 1: Train-Time MAPDA Attack for QMIX,
VDN and SEAC Using FGSM
Input: Director’s policy f; victim policy π; global
Q-value function Qglobal for victim policy π
(VDN and QMIX); observations ot at timestep t;
attacking budget ϵ
Output: Perturbed observations ˜ot at timestep t;
perturbing directions ¯at at timestep t
1 if algorithm is VDN or QMIX then
2
Victim agents obtain policy π according to Qglobal
3 end
4 Victim agents sample the unattacked actions at ∼π(·|ot);
5 Director samples the perturbing directions ¯at ∼f(·|ot);
6 if algorithm is VDN or QMIX then
7
Compute the global Q-value function Qglobal(ot, ·);
8
Compute the loss according to Eq. (20);
9
Compute the perturbations ϑ = ∇otL (at, ot, ¯at);
10
for victim agent i in M do
11
Obtain the adversarial observation
˜oi
t = oi
t + ϵ · sign(ϑi);
12
end
13 else
14
for victim agent i in M do
15
Compute the loss according to Eq. (21);
16
Compute the perturbations ϑi = ∇oitL (ai
t, oi
t, ¯ai
t);
17
Obtain the adversarial observation
˜oi
t = oi
t + ϵ · sign(ϑi);
18
end
19 end
algorithms. They do not directly derive policies but instead
determine policies by obtaining the Q-value function for each
action and selecting the maximum Q-value. Moreover, the
magnitudes of the Q-value function distribution and the action
probability distribution are consistent. Therefore, in (20), we
use the Q-value to calculate the loss. For VDN and QMIX,
it is crucial to account for the interactions among agents,
leading to agents sharing the loss function. On the other hand,
SEAC trains agents independently, resulting in individual loss
functions. We present the training procedure of the MAPDA
attack in Algorithm 1. By employing MAPDA, we solve
the inner minimum problem in (11).
Compared to existing
adversarial attack methods, this Director-Actor form of attack
is more potent, hence applying it leads to better results
in robust training. Building upon the solution of the inner
minimum problem, the next step is to solve the outer maximum
problem.
C. Robust Training in the Worst Case Scenario
Having identiﬁed the adversary that yields the lowest
rewards for the multiagent system, our objective in this
section is to enable the victim agents to attain the highest
possible rewards, even in the presence of such an adversary.
Our solution is to train both the victim agents and the
adversarial agents at the same time. Both are updated by the
Algorithm
2:
Robust
Training
Against
MAPDA
Adversary for QMIX, VDN and SEAC
Input: Randomly initialized director’s policy f; randomly
initialized victim policy π; randomly initialized
global Q-value function Qglobal for victim policy
π (VDN and QMIX); initial state s0 based on the
environment; initial observations o0 based on the
environment; attacking budget ϵ
1 for t=0,1,2,... do
2
Obtain perturbed observations ˜ot within ϵ and
perturbing directions ¯at at timestep t according to
Algorithm 1;
3
if algorithm is VDN or QMIX then
4
Victim agents obtain policy π according to
Qglobal
5
end
6
Victim agents take actions at ∼π(·|˜ot);
7
The environment proceeds to st+1;
8
if algorithm is VDN or QMIX then
9
Victim agents obtain rt;
10
Director obtains ot+1, −rt;
11
Victim agents save (st, ˜ot, at, rt, st+1, ˜ot+1) to
their joint buffer;
12
Director saves (st, ot, ¯at, −rt, st+1, ot+1) to the
adversarial agents’ joint buffer;
13
Victim agents update the joint Q-value function
Qglobal by minimizing the loss function in Eq. (4);
14
else
15
for victim agent i in M do
16
Victim agent i obtain ri
t;
17
Corresponding adversarial agent i−obtain oi
t,
ri−
t
= −ri
t;
18
Victim agent i saves (st, ˜oi
t, ai
t, ri
t, st+1, ˜oi
t+1)
to its buffer;
19
Corresponding adversarial agent i−saves
(st, oi
t, ¯ai
t, ri−
t , st+1, oi
t+1) to its buffer;
20
end
21
Victim agents update the policy π by minimizing
the loss function in Eq. (7);
22
end
23
Director updates the policy f based on the
corresponding MADRL algorithm;
24 end
MADRL algorithms and use the same loss functions. The
detailed training process is shown in Algorithm 2. In this way,
we can solve the outer maximum problem in (11).
V. EXPERIMENTS
A. Environments
Based on the above method, we enhance the robust-
ness of the MADRL algorithms in environments related to
Industry 5.0. We choose two environments related to human-
machine interaction and robotics in Industry 5.0. They are
MARL_CAVs [36] and robotic-warehouse (RWARE) [37].
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Texas at Arlington. Downloaded on June 27,2026 at 06:35:58 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

GUO et al.: ROBUST TRAINING IN MADRL AGAINST OPTIMAL ADVERSARY
4963
Fig. 2.
Three blue cars are CAVs and the two green cars are HDVs, as
shown in (a). If there is no attack, CAV #1 should go around the obstacle on
the right side of the ramp and change lanes, but if it is interfered with by the
adversarial attack, it will hit the obstacle as shown in (b).
Fig. 3.
Demonstration of robots carrying in a warehouse is shown in (a).
A normal robot should pick up the required shelf (green grid) from a pile
of shelves and move it to the target (black grid). But an attacked robot will
make wrong moves, such as picking up an unneeded shelf, as circled in (b).
Additionally, we utilize the SMAC [38] environment to evalu-
ate the performance of our method in a general environment.
1) MARL_CAVs:
This
environment
simulates
the
interaction between connected and autonomous vehicles
(CAVs) and human-driven vehicles (HDVs) on a ramp.
We consider scenarios involving 3 CAVs and 5 CAVs
co-existing with randomly placed HDVs. Fig. 2 provides
a visual representation of the environment, including
the key attributes of regular and victim agents.
2) RWARE: This environment emulates multiple robots
moving goods in a warehouse. We consider two sce-
narios: 2 robots (referred to as 2ag) and 4 robots
(referred to as 4ag) operating within a 10x11 grid. The
RWARE environment and the normal and victim agents’
performance are shown in Fig. 3.
3) SMAC: The environment is an extension of the game
StarCraft II, simulating the battle process between two
teams. The members within each team have a coop-
erative relationship, while the teams themselves are
in an adversarial relationship. We use the MADRL
algorithm to control one of the teams. In the exper-
iment, we employ the 2 Stalkers versus 1 Spine
Crawler (2s_versus_1sc) team conﬁguration to evaluate
the performance of our method.
B. Baselines
To demonstrate the advantages of our robust training
method, we compare it against common baseline methods.
TABLE I
HYPER-PARAMETERS OF THE EXPERIMENTS
1) We employ the original versions of QMIX, VDN, and
SEAC, which have not undergone robust training.
2) FGSM [18]: FGSM is a classical adversarial sampling
technique that uses gradients to perform adversarial
attacks. It perturbs the input in the opposite direction of
the gradient descent by utilizing gradient information.
We use FGSM to perturb a multiagent system.
3) PGD [35]: PGD is another classical gradient-based
adversarial attack method that generates adversarial
samples iteratively. It is more complex and effective
than FGSM. And it is insensitive to the choice of
hyperparameters, offering a stable and dependable way
for creating adversarial examples.
4) ATLA [14]: We utilize ATLA to directly train the state
adversary, enabling the generation of optimal pertur-
bations without involving the policy adversary. The
resulting adversary’s action space matches the dimen-
sions of the victim agents’ state space precisely, but it
involves a high level of training complexity.
C. Conﬁgurations
1) Training: To make the experimental effect more obvi-
ous, we attack all agents in the multiagent system, i.e.,
M = N. In the MARL_CAVs environment, we train the QMIX
and VDN models. For the 3 CAVs scenarios, we utilize
perturbations of size ϵ = 0.05. For the 5 CAVs scenario, ϵ =
0.02. In the RWARE environment, we let ϵ = 0.02. In SMAC,
the perturbation size is set to ϵ = 0.2.
In our MAPDA implementation, the adversarial agents are
trained using the identical algorithm as the victim agent. To
attack the victim agents, the actor employs the FGSM method
to generate adversarial examples. In ATLA implementation,
the perturbations are generated by the MADRL algorithm
MAPPO.
Considering the greater difﬁculty of training in reward-
sparse environments, we leave the perturbations unaddressed
for the ﬁrst half of the training cycles in the RWARE
environment and add them in the second half. Table I shows
a detailed hyper-parameter conﬁguration. The structure of the
deep network involved in the experiments is shown in Fig. 4.
We refer to the models without robust training as Original
QMIX, Original VDN, and Original SEAC. The models
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Texas at Arlington. Downloaded on June 27,2026 at 06:35:58 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

4964
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SYSTEMS, MAN, AND CYBERNETICS: SYSTEMS, VOL. 55, NO. 7, JULY 2025
(a)
(b)
(c)
Fig. 4.
(a) Shows the structure of the network for computing the Q-value
Qi of agent i in QMIX and VDN algorithms, (b) demonstrates the structure
of the mixing network for computing Qglobal in QMIX, and (c) illustrates the
structure of the network of agent i in SEAC. The adversarial agents use the
same structures as the victim agents’.
trained by FGSM are named FGSM-QMIX, FGSM-VDN,
and FGSM-SEAC. Similarly, the models trained by ATLA
are referred to as ATLA-QMIX, ATLA-VDN, and ATLA-
SEAC. Finally, the models trained by our methods are named
RoQMIX, RoVDN, and RoSEAC.
2) Testing: We evaluate the performance of these trained
models using random noise, Gaussian noise, and FGSM
attacks. Additionally, we assess their performance under clean
observations. In the 3 CAVs environment, we apply attacks
ranging in size from 0.05 to 0.25, growing by 0.05. In the
5 CAVs environment, the attacks range from 0.02 to 0.06,
increasing by 0.01. In the RWARE environment, the victim
agents are perturbed with sizes ranging from 0.02 to 0.04,
growing by 0.005. To ensure the completion of an episode,
we use the termination signal from the environment as the
criterion to determine whether an episode has ended. This
approach ensures the effectiveness of our method throughout
the entire duration of a task. Therefore, the experimental
results can demonstrate the performance of our method in
long-term stability.
D. Results
We analyze the defensive capability, generalization, and
performance under clean observations of these methods.
To evaluate the robustness of models trained in the
MARL_CAVs environment, we employ two metrics: the total
reward of an episode, referred to as return, and the collision
frequency, referred to as crash rate. These metrics quantify
the performance of the multiple agents. In the RWARE envi-
ronment, we assess the algorithms’ robustness by measuring
the average return per episode. In the SMAC environment, we
measure performance based on the average return per episode
and the win rate. Additionally, we show the performance
improvements of robust models over robustness-free models
in percentage.
1) Defensive Capability: Based on the MARL_CAVs and
RWARE environments, we perform a longitudinal comparison
between our robust training method and the existing baselines.
The comparison focuses on maintaining the same perturbation
size for both testing and training. The experimental results are
presented in Tables II and III.
Random and Gaussian noise perturbations are consid-
ered mild in intensity, resulting in subtle yet consistent
performance improvements for our robustly trained models
using MAPDA compared to other models. Speciﬁcally, under
these weaker perturbations, our RoQMIX demonstrates a
minimum improvement of 2.7% in return compared to the
original QMIX in the 5CAVs environment with Gaussian
noise. Moreover, it achieves a maximum improvement of 9.8%
in the 5CAVs environment with random noise. Similarly, our
RoVDN achieves improvements ranging from 1.7% in 5CAVs
with random noise to 12.6% in 3CAVs with Gaussian noise.
The similar trend can be seen in our RoSEAC, where it
enhances the original SEAC by 1.9% in 4ag with random noise
up to 14.5% in 4ag with Gaussian noise.
Furthermore, our method demonstrates a more signiﬁcant
improvement in performance against stronger attacks like
FGSM. More precisely, when subjected to FGSM attacks, our
RoQMIX yields a minimum improvement of 9% in return
compared to the original QMIX in the 5CAVs environment
with FGSM attacks. In addition, it shows a maximum improve-
ment of 857.6% in the 3CAVs environment with FGSM.
Likewise, our RoVDN exhibits improvements ranging from
40.8% in 3CAVs with FGSM to 63.4% in 5CAVs with FGSM
in comparison to the original VDN. We observe a comparable
pattern in our RoSEAC, as it enhances the original SEAC by
51.8% in 2ag with FGSM up to 176.5% in 4ag with FGSM.
For the crash rate in MARL_CAVs, the models trained by
our method do not show signiﬁcant improvement compared to
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Texas at Arlington. Downloaded on June 27,2026 at 06:35:58 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

GUO et al.: ROBUST TRAINING IN MADRL AGAINST OPTIMAL ADVERSARY
4965
TABLE II
PERFORMANCE OF DIFFERENT METHODS IN MARL_CAVS ENVIRONMENT UNDER THREE ATTACK MODES
TABLE III
PERFORMANCE OF DIFFERENT METHODS IN RWARE ENVIRONMENT UNDER THREE ATTACK MODES
other baselines under random noise and Gaussian noise, but
they slightly outperform other baselines under FGSM attacks.
2) Generalization: To demonstrate the generalizability of
our robustly trained model, we examine the performance of our
method and other baseline methods under increasing perturba-
tion intensities in MARL_CAVs and RWARE environments.
Figs. 5 and 6 provide visual comparisons between the different
methods.
The
robust
models
trained
with
our
method
exhibit
minimal performance degradation as the perturbation inten-
sity increases. Speciﬁcally, when perturbed by random and
Gaussian noise, our robust models outperform the baseline
models. Despite a decrease in performance under the strong
FGSM attack, our robust models still maintain a noticeable
advantage. These results validate the superior generalization
capabilities of our robust training method.
In addition, we apply our approach to SMAC, demonstrating
its effectiveness beyond industrial settings. We select the
strongest attack, FGSM, and compare our method with the
baseline approaches in the 2s_versus_1sc scenario. The com-
parison ﬁndings are presented in Table IV. The experimental
results demonstrate that our method exhibits signiﬁcant robust-
ness in the SMAC environment, surpassing existing baseline
approaches. This indicates that our method can be applied to
a wide range of environmental settings.
3) Performance Under Clean Observations: Our objective
is to develop robustly trained models that perform well when
TABLE IV
PERFORMANCE OF DIFFERENT METHODS UNDER FGSM
ATTACK IN SMAC ENVIRONMENT
attacked and also function effectively with clean observations.
To evaluate this, we assess the performance of models trained
by various methods in attack-free environments. The results
of these evaluations are presented in Tables V and VI.
Our robust method outperforms the robustly trained base-
line models in most cases and occasionally surpasses the
performance of the nonrobustly trained models. Occasionally,
the models trained by our robust method exhibit a slight
performance decrease compared to models trained without the
robust method in clean observations. This can be attributed
to the models overﬁtting the generated noise during the deep
learning process. Therefore, compared to models that have
not undergone robust training, the models trained by our
method exhibit less adaptability to attack-free environments.
However, this minor degradation in performance remains
within acceptable limits. The models trained by our method
in MARL_CAVs do not exhibit notable performance enhance-
ment in terms of the crash rate metric clean observations.
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Texas at Arlington. Downloaded on June 27,2026 at 06:35:58 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

4966
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SYSTEMS, MAN, AND CYBERNETICS: SYSTEMS, VOL. 55, NO. 7, JULY 2025
Fig. 5.
Comparison of the effects of four methods on improving QMIX and VDN’s robustness under three attacks in the MARL_CAVs environment with
different sizes of perturbations. Each subﬁgure is entitled in the format “<environment conﬁguration>-<attack mode>.”
Fig. 6.
Comparison of the effects of four methods on improving the SEAC’s robustness under three attacks in the RWARE environment with different sizes
of perturbations. Each subﬁgure is entitled in the format “<environment conﬁguration>-< attack mode>.”
The reason for this phenomenon is that all methods can
fulﬁll basic anti-crash tasks under clean observations without
any attacks, resulting in limited room for improvement. The
difference between our method and the others is reﬂected in
metrics rather than crash rate, such as speed stability, hence
our method offers higher returns.
VI. CONCLUSION
This article investigates the relationship between state and
policy adversaries and introduces a method to convert the
optimal state adversary into the optimal policy adversary. This
approach enables us to apply signiﬁcant perturbations to the
agents during MADRL training. To facilitate this, we propose
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Texas at Arlington. Downloaded on June 27,2026 at 06:35:58 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

GUO et al.: ROBUST TRAINING IN MADRL AGAINST OPTIMAL ADVERSARY
4967
TABLE V
PERFORMANCE OF DIFFERENT METHODS UNDER CLEAN
OBSERVATIONS IN MARL_CAVS ENVIRONMENT
TABLE VI
PERFORMANCE OF DIFFERENT METHODS UNDER CLEAN OBSERVATIONS
IN RWARE ENVIRONMENT
a theoretical model named PA-Dec-POMDP and an MAPDA
attack framework for training. Additionally, we enhance the
robustness of the CTDE-based algorithms (VDN and QMIX)
and SEAC and apply them in industry-related settings.
Our
ﬁndings can be used to address real-world problems, especially
in the realm of Industry 5.0, within the physical world.
The presented work enables automation machines reliant on
multiagent systems such as autonomous driving and drone
swarms to operate more stably and efﬁciently.
During
deployment, it is essential to consider how to incorporate
physical inﬂuences from the environment such as friction.
Our future work will focus on exploring state adversar-
ial attacks, improving the MAPDA algorithm we proposed,
designing more efﬁcient training frameworks, and optimizing
the search for the best attack strategies. Additionally, we will
strengthen the theoretical foundation by developing validated
and more reliable robust training methods. Furthermore, we
will delve into additional attack forms, such as backdoor
attacks, and integrate them with our methodology.
REFERENCES
[1] M. Yang, G. Liu, Z. Zhou, and J. Wang, “Partially observable mean ﬁeld
multi-agent reinforcement learning based on graph attention network for
UAV swarms,” Drones, vol. 7, no. 7, p. 476, 2023.
[2] S. Chen, G. Liu, Z. Zhou, K. Zhang, and J. Wang, “Robust
multi-agent
reinforcement
learning
method
based
on
adversar-
ial domain randomization for real-world dual-UAV cooperation,”
IEEE Trans. Intell. Veh., vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 1615–1627, Jan. 2024,
doi: 10.1109/TIV.2023.3307134.
[3] J. Xue et al., “Robust wind-resistant hovering control of quadrotor
UAVs using deep reinforcement learning,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Veh., early
access, Oct. 16, 2023, doi: 10.1109/TIV.2023.3324687.
[4] P. K. R. Maddikunta et al., “Industry 5.0: A survey on enabling
technologies
and
potential
applications,”
J.
Ind.
Inf.
Integrat.,
vol. 26,
Aug.
2021,
Art.
no.
100257,
[Online].
Available:
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jii.2021.100257
[5] Z. Zhou, G. Liu, and Y. Tang, “Multiagent reinforcement learn-
ing: Methods, trustworthiness, applications in intelligent vehicles, and
challenges,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Veh., early access, Jun. 3, 2024,
doi: 10.1109/TIV.2024.3408257.
[6] R. Hare and Y. Tang, “Hierarchical deep reinforcement learning
with experience sharing for metaverse in education” IEEE Trans.
Syst., Man, Cybern., Syst., vol. 53, no. 4, pp. 2047–2055, Apr. 2023,
doi: 10.1109/TSMC.2022.3227919.
[7] T. Rashid et al., “Monotonic value function factorization for deep multi-
agent reinforcement learning,” J. Mach. Learn. Res., vol. 21, no. 1,
pp. 7234–7284, 2020.
[8] P. Sunehag et al., “Value-decomposition networks for cooperative multi-
agent learning based on team reward,” in Proc. 17th Int. Conf. Auton.
Agents MultiAgent Syst., Stockholm, Sweden, 2018, pp. 2085–2087.
[9] F. Christianos, L. Schäfer, and S. Albrecht, “Shared experience actor–
critic for multi-agent reinforcement learning,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf.
Process. Syst., vol. 33, 2020, pp. 10707–10717.
[10] J. Guo et al., “Towards comprehensive testing on the robustness of
cooperative multi-agent reinforcement learning,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF
Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. Workshops (CVPRW), 2022,
pp. 114–121.
[11] J. Lin, K. Dzeparoska, S. Q. Zhang, A. Leon-Garcia, and N. Papernot,
“On the robustness of cooperative multi-agent reinforcement learning,”
in Proc. IEEE Security Privacy Workshops (SPW), San Francisco, CA,
USA, 2020, pp. 62–68, doi: 10.1109/SPW50608.2020.00027.
[12] V. Behzadan and A. Munir, “Whatever does not kill deep reinforcement
learning, makes it stronger,” 2017, arXiv:1712.09344.
[13] H. Zhang et al., “Robust deep reinforcement learning against adversarial
perturbations on state observations,” in Proc. 34th Int. Conf. Neural Inf.
Process. Syst., 2020, pp. 2629–2634.
[14] H. Zhang, H. Chen, D. Boning, and C.-J. Hsieh, “Robust reinforcement
learning on state observations with learned optimal adversary,” in Proc.
Int. Conf. Learn. Rep. (ICLR), 2021, p. 6.
[15] M. Yang, G. Liu, Z. Zhou, and J. Wang, “Probabilistic automatabased
method for enhancing performance of deep reinforcement learn-
ing
systems,”
IEEE/CAA
J.
Automatica
Sinica,
vol. 11,
no. 11,
pp. 2327–2339, Nov. 2024.
[16] Y. Sun, R. Zheng, Y. Liang, and F. Huang, “Who is the strongest enemy?
Towards optimal and efﬁcient evasion attacks in deep RL,” in Proc. 10th
Int. Conf. Learn. Rep. (ICLR), 2022, pp. 1–8.
[17] J. Kos and D. Song, “Delving into adversarial attacks on deep policies,”
in Proc. 5th Int. Conf. Learn. Rep. (ICLR), Apr. 2017, pp. 1–8.
[18] I. J. Goodfellow, J. Shlens, and C. Szegedy, “Explaining and harnessing
adversarial examples,” in Proc. 3rd Int. Conf. Learn. Rep. (ICLR), May
2015, pp. 1–8.
[19] E. Tretschk, S. J. Oh, and M. Fritz, “Sequential attacks on agents for
long-term adversarial goals,” in Proc. ACM Comput. Sci. Cars Symp.,
2018, pp. 1–8.
[20] S. Baluja and I. Fischer, “Learning to attack: Adversarial transformation
networks,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2018, p. 32.
[21] Q. Shen, Y. Li, H. Jiang, Z. Wang, and T. Zhao, “Deep reinforcement
learning with robust and smooth policy,” in Proc. 37th Int. Conf. Mach.
Learn., Jul. 2020, pp. 13–18.
[22] Z. Liu et al., “Towards robust and safe reinforcement learning with
benign off-policy data,” in Proc. 40th Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., Jul. 2023,
pp. 23–29.
[23] X. He, W. Huang, and C. Lv, “Trustworthy autonomous driving via
defense-aware robust reinforcement learning against worst-case obser-
vational perturbations,” Transp. Res. C Emerg. Technol., vol. 163, Jun.
2024, Art. no. 104632,
[24] Y. Hu and Z. Zhang, “Sparse adversarial attack in multi-agent reinforce-
ment learning,” 2022, arXiv:2205.09362.
[25] N.
H.
Pham,
L.
M.
Nguyen,
J.
Chen,
H.
T.
Lam,
S.
Das,
and
T.-W.
Weng.
“Evaluating
robustness
of
cooperative
MARL:
A
model-based
approach.”
2023.
[Online].
Available:
https://openreview.net/forum?id=kugE_tCwsC
[26] Z. Zhou and G. Liu, “Robustness testing for multi-agent reinforcement
learning: State perturbations on critical agents,” in Frontiers in Artiﬁcial
Intelligence and Applications. New York, NY, USA: IOS Press, 2023.
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Texas at Arlington. Downloaded on June 27,2026 at 06:35:58 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

4968
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SYSTEMS, MAN, AND CYBERNETICS: SYSTEMS, VOL. 55, NO. 7, JULY 2025
[27] S. Han, S. Su, S. He, S. Han, H. Yang, and F. Miao. “What is the
solution for state-adversarial multi-agent reinforcement learning?” 2023.
[Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2212.02705
[28] H. Shi, G. Liu, K. Zhang, Z. Zhou, and J. Wang, “MARL Sim2Real
transfer: Merging physical reality with digital virtuality in metaverse,”
IEEE Trans. Syst., Man, Cybern., Syst., vol. 53, no. 4, pp. 2107–2117,
Apr. 2023, doi: 10.1109/TSMC.2022.3229213.
[29] Z. Zhou, G. Liu, and M. Zhou, “A robust mean-ﬁeld actor–critic
reinforcement learning against adversarial perturbations on agent
states,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 35, no. 10,
pp. 14370–14381, Oct. 2024, doi: 10.1109/TNNLS.2023.3278715.
[30] W. Guo, G. Liu, Z. Zhou, L. Wang, and J. Wang, “Enhancing the
robustness of QMIX against state-adversarial attacks,” Neurocomputing,
vol. 572, Mar. 2024, Art. no. 127191.
[31] L. Yu, Y. Qiu, Q. Yao, Y. Shen, X. Zhang, and J. Wang, “Robust
communicative multi-agent reinforcement learning with active defense,”
in Proc. AAAI, vol. 38, 2024, pp. 17575–17582.
[32] F. A. Oliehoek and C. Amato, A Concise Introduction to Decentralized
POMDPs. Cham, Switzerland: Springer, 2016.
[33] R. J. Williams, “Simple statistical gradient-following algorithms for con-
nectionist reinforcement learning,” Mach. Learn., vol. 8, pp. 229–256,
Jun. 1992.
[34] C. Yu et al., “The surprising effectiveness of PPO in cooperative multi-
agent games,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., vol. 35, 2022,
pp. 24611–24624.
[35] A. Madry, A. Makelov, L. Schmidt, D. Tsipras, and A. Vladu, “Towards
deep learning models resistant to adversarial attacks,” in Proc. Int. Conf.
Learn. Rep., 2018, pp. 1–6.
[36] D. Chen et al., “Deep multi-agent reinforcement learning for highway
on-ramp merging in mixed trafﬁc,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst.,
vol. 24, no. 11, pp. 11623–11638, Nov. 2023.
[37] G. Papoudakis, F. Christianos, L. Schäfer, and S. V. Albrecht,
“Benchmarking multi-agent deep reinforcement learning algorithms
in cooperative tasks,” in Proc. Neural Inf. Process. Syst. Datasets
Benchmarks (NeurIPS), 2021, pp. 1–8.
[38] M. Samvelyan et al., “The StarCraft multi-agent challenge,” 2019,
arxiv.abs/1902.04043.
Weiran Guo received the B.S. degree in information
security from Tongji University, Shanghai, China,
in 2023, where she is currently pursuing the M.S.
degree in computer software and theory with the
School of Computer Science and Technology.
Her current research interests include reinforce-
ment learning and multiagent systems.
Guanjun Liu (Senior Member, IEEE) received the
Ph.D. degree in computer software and theory from
Tongji University, Shanghai, China, in 2011.
He was a Postdoctoral Research Fellow with the
Singapore University of Technology and Design,
Singapore, from 2011 to 2013, and a Postdoctoral
Research Fellow with the Humboldt University of
Berlin, Berlin, Germany, from 2013 to 2014, sup-
ported by the Alexander von Humboldt Foundation.
He is currently a Professor with the Department
of Computer Science, Tongji University. He has
authored over 170 papers and 5 books. His research interests include Petri net
theory, model checking, reinforcement learning, multiagent systems, cyber-
physical systems, UAV, and credit card fraud detection.
Dr. Liu served as a Guest Editor for some journals including the IEEE
TRANSACTIONS ON COMPUTATIONAL SOCIAL SYSTEMS, the Mathematical
Problems in Engineering, Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Autonomous Systems,
Drones, and the Journal of Software (in Chinese), and also served as a
program committee member for many international conferences. He is now an
Associate Editor of the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMPUTATIONAL SOCIAL
SYSTEMS and the journal of Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Autonomous Systems.
Ziyuan Zhou (Graduate Student Member, IEEE)
received the B.S. degree in electronic information
science and technology from China University of
Mining and Technology, Xuzhou, China, in 2020.
She is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree in
computer software and theory with the School
of
Computer
Science
and
Technology,
Tongji
University, Shanghai, China.
Her research interests include reinforcement learn-
ing, multiagent system, and adversarial attacks.
Jiacun Wang (Senior Member, IEEE) received
the Ph.D. degree in computer engineering from
the Nanjing University of Science and Technology,
Nanjing, China, in 1991.
He was a Research Associate with the School of
Computer Science, Florida International University,
Miami, FL, USA. From 2001 to 2004, he was a
Member of Scientiﬁc Staff with Nortel Networks,
Richardson, TX, USA. He is currently a Professor
of Software Engineering with Monmouth University,
West Long Branch, NJ, USA. He has authored Timed
Petri Nets: Theory and Application Kluwer (1998), Real-Time Embedded
Systems (Wiley, 2018), and Formal Methods in Computer Science (CRC,
2019), edited Handbook of Finite State Based Models and Applications (CRC,
2012), and published over 130 research papers in journals and conferences.
His research interests include software engineering, discrete event systems,
formal methods, machine learning, and real-time distributed systems.
Dr. Wang served as the general chair, the program chair, the special session
chair, or the steering committee chair for many international conferences.
He was an Associate Editor of the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SYSTEMS,
MAN, AND CYBERNETICS—Part C: Applications and Reviews Publication
Information. He is currently an Associate Editor of IEEE/CAA JOURNAL
OF AUTOMATICA SINICA.
Ying Tang (Senior Member, IEEE) received the
Ph.D. degree in electrical and computer engineering
from New Jersey Institute of Technology, Newark,
NJ, USA, in 2001.
She is currently Professor of Electrical and
Computer
Engineering
with
Rowan
University,
Glassboro, NJ. Her work has resulted in two USA
patents, and over 230 peer-reviewed publications,
including 77 journal articles, 2 edited books, and 6
book chapters. Her research interests are in cyber-
physical social systems, extended reality, intelligent
learning environments, modeling and adaptive control for computerintegrated
systems, and sustainable production automation.
Dr. Tang is presently Associate Editor of IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON
SYSTEMS, MAN, AND CYBERNETICS: SYSTEMS, IEEE TRANSACTIONS
ON INTELLIGENT VEHICLES, IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMPUTATIONAL
SOCIAL SYSTEMS, and Springers Discover Artiﬁcial Intelligence. She is
the Founding Chair of Technical Committee on Intelligent Solutions to
Human-aware Sustainability for IEEE Systems, Man, and Cybernetics, and
the Founding Chair of Technical Committee on Sustainable Production
Automation for IEEE Robotics and Automation.
Miaomiao Wang received the master’s degree in
pattern recognition and intelligent control from
China Academy of Space Technology, Beijing,
China, in 2014.
In 2014, and then she joined the Beijing Institute
of Control Engineering, Beijing, China, as an
aerospace engineer, where she is currently a Senior
Aerospace Engineer. Her main research ﬁeld is
space optoelectronic measurement, and perception
technology and instruments.
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Texas at Arlington. Downloaded on June 27,2026 at 06:35:58 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
