1
Fault-Tolerant MARL for CAVs under Observation
Perturbations for Highway On-Ramp Merging
Yuchen Shi, Huaxin Pei, Yi Zhang, Senior Member, IEEE, Danya Yao, Member, IEEE
Abstract—Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning (MARL) holds
significant promise for enabling cooperative driving among
Connected and Automated Vehicles (CAVs). However, its practical
application is hindered by a critical limitation, i.e., insufficient fault
tolerance against observational faults. Such faults, which appear
as perturbations in the vehicles’ perceived data, can substantially
compromise the performance of MARL-based driving systems.
Addressing this problem presents two primary challenges. One is
to generate adversarial perturbations that effectively stress the
policy during training, and the other is to equip vehicles with
the capability to mitigate the impact of corrupted observations.
To overcome the challenges, we propose a fault-tolerant MARL
method for cooperative on-ramp vehicles incorporating two key
agents. First, an adversarial fault injection agent is co-trained
to generate perturbations that actively challenge and harden
the vehicle policies. Second, we design a novel fault-tolerant
vehicle agent equipped with a self-diagnosis capability, which
leverages the inherent spatio-temporal correlations in vehicle state
sequences to detect faults and reconstruct credible observations,
thereby shielding the policy from misleading inputs. Experiments
in a simulated highway merging scenario demonstrate that our
method significantly outperforms baseline MARL approaches,
achieving near-fault-free levels of safety and efficiency under
various observation fault patterns.
Index Terms—Cooperative Driving, Multi-agent Reinforcement
Learning, Fault Tolerance, Perturbed Observations, On-ramp
Merging
I. INTRODUCTION
M
ULTI-VEHICLE cooperative autonomous driving is
anticipated to significantly enhance traffic efficiency
and safety [1], [2], [3], [4]. Among the driving scenarios,
highway on-ramp merging represents a critical bottleneck
where coordination faults can lead to severe congestion and
safety hazards. Through real-time information exchange, CAVs
can acquire a more comprehensive understanding of traffic
conditions, enabling them to make more efficient and safer
decisions. However, unavoidable communication and perception
faults [5], [6], [7] cause the observed data to deviate from
the ground truth. Such observation perturbations directly
mislead the decision-making of vehicles receiving faulty data,
subsequently propagating the disruptive impact throughout the
collaborative system. This propagation can cause the vehicle
This work was supported in part by the National Natural Science Foundation
of China under Grant 62503259. (Corresponding author: Huaxin Pei.)
Yuchen Shi and Huaxin Pei are with the Department of Automation, Tsinghua
University, Beijing 100084, China (e-mail: shiyuche21@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn;
phx17@tsinghua.org.cn).
Yi Zhang and Danya Yao are with the Department of Automation, Beijing
National Research Center for Information Science and Technology (BNRist),
Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China. (e-mail: zhyi@tsinghua.edu.cn;
yaody@tsinghua.edu.cn).
fleet to lose its cooperative decision-making capability and
potentially trigger safety incidents [8].
With the rapid advancement of Reinforcement Learning
(RL) technology, its application in the autonomous driving
domain has become increasingly prevalent [9]. For cooperative
decision-making problems, MARL demonstrates significant
advantages, exhibiting powerful exploration capabilities and
the potential to handle complex environmental scenarios [10],
[11], [12]. However, the high performance of vehicles’ policies
relies on idealized environmental assumptions. If potential
communication or perception faults are overlooked during
training, vehicles will likely struggle to respond effectively
when encountering unforeseen faults during execution due to
insufficient experience and unprepared policies [13]. In on-
ramp merging scenarios, if a vehicle misobserves the positions
and velocities of the surrounding vehicles, it is highly likely
to compromise traffic safety or efficiency, especially at the
merging point, as illustrated in Fig. 1. Regrettably, to the best of
our knowledge, current MARL studies for cooperative driving
rarely consider the impact mechanisms of potential perception
or communication faults. The lack of fault tolerance against
such potential disturbances has become a critical bottleneck
hindering the practical deployment of MARL-based cooperative
driving algorithms.
Considering faults during the training process is necessary for
improving fault-tolerant ability. Furthermore, even intentionally
incorporating fault simulations presents significant challenges.
The first challenge is to generate perturbations that effectively
stress the policy during training. Compared to rule-based
systems, the impact of observation perturbations on MARL’s
neural networks is harder to model intuitively [14], owing to
their black-box and data-driven characteristics. Consequently,
random or manual fault injection mostly introduces pertur-
bations with inappropriate magnitudes which have negligible
impact, leading the training process to inadequately cover
challenging key faults. The second challenge is to equip
vehicles with the capability to mitigate the impact of corrupted
observations. This stems from the inherent uncertainty under
faults: a vehicle cannot determine if its own observations are
perturbed, while its perceptions of other vehicles’ critical states
such as positions and velocities may also be erroneous. This
dual uncertainty creates a dilemma: blindly trusting faulty data
may lead to unsafe decisions, while excessive distrust forces
overly conservative behaviors, significantly compromising
traffic efficiency.
To
address
these
challenges,
this
paper
proposes
Observational
Fault-Tolerant
MARL
(OFT-MARL)
for
CAVs in on-ramp merging scenarios. OFT-MARL incorporates
arXiv:2511.23193v1  [cs.RO]  28 Nov 2025

2
1
Training 
Experience
Fault-free scenario
Optimal Passing Order: 2 1 3
Vehicles maintain optimal headways
Efficiency 
Efficiency
Safety
Acceleration
Maintenance
Deceleration
Sub-optimal 
Passing Order
Vehicle Collision
Excessive Headway
Action of Vehicle 3
Scenario Illustration
Negative Effect
Reason
Scenario Under Fault
1
2
2
1
2
2
1
2
2
Initial 
State
1
Perspective 
of Vehicle 3
1
Deviation
Fig. 1: Vehicle 1 suddenly misobserves the position of vehicle 2, perceiving it at the location marked in red (Left Middle).
In the fault-free scenario, all vehicles would maintain velocities and proceed according to the original cooperative strategy
(Left Top). However, influenced by the fault, vehicle 1 chooses to decelerate and yield, which is contrasted with the training
experience from the perspective of vehicle 3 (Left Bottom). Further, vehicle 3’s action becomes unpredictable due to deviations
in vehicle 1’s behavior. Regardless of vehicle 3’s action, traffic efficiency or safety may be affected for different reasons (Right).
The blue, green, and red colors behind vehicles indicate their maintenance, acceleration and deceleration behaviors respectively.
two key modules, forming a defensive-offensive synergy:
the fault injection agent hardens the policy during training
while the fault-tolerant vehicle agent shields it, resulting in a
fault-tolerant system. OFT-MARL is designed as follows:
To tackle the first challenge of effective perturbation, we
introduce a global fault injection agent. This agent aggregates
observations and fault information from all vehicles, and
calculates the most disruptive observation perturbation strategy
based on global situation analysis. The fault injection agent
is co-trained concurrently with the vehicles’ policies. By
continuously exposing the vehicle agents to these optimally ad-
versarial perturbations, their policy’s fault-tolerant capabilities
are substantially enhanced through adversarial learning.
Simultaneously, to address the second challenge brought
about by corrupted observations, we design the vehicle agent
with an intrinsic fault diagnosis capability. This capability is
grounded in the spatio-temporal correlation inherent in vehicle
operational data. For instance, vehicle trajectories should exhibit
continuity and smoothness, without frequent occurrences of
sharp acceleration or deceleration during normal driving. By
analyzing the temporal characteristics of state sequences, the
vehicle can discriminate data that significantly deviates from
these typical dynamics and subsequently reconstruct credible
estimates of the true observations. This provides vehicles
with credibility assessments and correction references, thereby
assisting them in forming more reasonable and efficient policies.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section II
reviews related work, followed by background knowledge
in Section III. Section IV details the proposed fault-tolerant
MARL approach for CAVs. Section V showcases and analyzes
the experimental results. Finally, Section VI concludes the
paper and suggests future research directions.
II. RELATED WORKS
A. Cooperative Driving
Traditional cooperative driving methods are typically
achieved by establishing explicit optimization objectives,
designing right-of-way allocation rules, and implementing
trajectory planning [15], [16], [17], [18]. However, traditional
methods can be limited in scalability and adaptability in
highly dynamic and complex scenarios. This has motivated
the adoption of MARL, which excels at learning cooperative
strategies directly from interaction data.
To tackle various practical challenges in traffic, researchers
have developed solutions built upon foundational frameworks.
Ramp merging scenario is one of the typical scenario for algo-
rithm verification. For instance, Chen et al. [19] incorporated a
priority-based safety supervisor into MA2C to enhance safety
considerations. Pan et al. [20] proposed Trust-MARL based on
MASAC to control mixed traffic flows on ramps. Chen et al.
[21] integrated graph neural networks with MADQN to handle
dynamic vehicle numbers and rapidly expanding joint action
spaces for cooperative lane change control during merging.
In this work, to achieve precise velocity control, we enhance
the fault tolerance of the MADDPG [22] algorithm, which is
suitable for continuous action control, and validate it in ramp
scenarios.
B. Fault Tolerance for Cooperative Driving
Classical fault-tolerant methods for cooperative driving
are typically implemented through scheduling rule design

3
or game-theoretic optimization. Pei et al. [23] constructs a
rule-based fault-tolerant cooperative driving strategy. He et al.
[24] proposed a global planning and local gaming framework.
Liu et al. [25] introduced a method for real-time decision
adjustments, where faulty and normal vehicles can execute
distinct decision models in a distributed manner. Ma et al.
[26] transformed robust autonomous intersection control into
a weighted maximal clique problem with restrictions and
employed a heuristic algorithm to explore the solution space.
Such traditional methods possess certain advantages in fault
handling, for their relatively fixed and predictable decision
rules. To address potential input biases in RL-based vehicle
policy networks, He et al. utilized Bayesian optimization to
approximate input perturbations for black-box vehicle policies
[27], while applied gradient descent for white-box scenarios
with known policy gradients [28]. However, most studies
about robust RL-based vehicle policies focus on single-vehicle
settings, with limited research on multi-vehicle interactions.
III. BACKGROUND
A. Markov Games
A multi-agent system with N agents can be modeled as
decentralized partially observable Markov decision processes
(Dec-POMDPs) [29], [30], defined as < S, A, T, R, Y, O, γ >,
where S is the set of states, A = {A1, ..., AN} is the set of
joint actions, T is the transition function, O = {O1, ..., ON}
is the set of observations, and Y = {Y1, ..., YN} is the set of
observation functions. At each time step t, agent i receives
a partial observation oi = Yi(s) : S →Oi, takes action ai
according to policy πθi: ai = πθi(oi) : Oi →Ai, and receives
a reward ri = R(s, a1, ..., aN) : S × A1 × ... × AN →R.
Therefore, the environment at the next time step can be
described as s′ = T(s, a1, ..., aN) : S×A1×...×AN →S. The
objective for each agent is to maximize its expected discounted
reward E[Ri] = E[Pt0
t′=t γt′−tri,t′], where γ ∈[0, 1] is the
discount factor, ri,t′ is the reward at time step t′ and t0 is the
end time step of an episode.
B. Deep Deterministic Policy Gradient (DDPG)
DDPG [31] helps an agent to learn a deterministic continuous
action a = µθ(s), where µ is the actor network parameterized
by θ. The policy gradient is:
∇θJ(θ) = Es∼U(D)[∇θµθ(s)∇aQϕ(s, a)|a=µθ(s)].
(1)
Here, U(D) denotes experiences sampled from the replay buffer
D, which stores tuples (s, s′, a, r). Qϕ(s, a) is the Q-value
function, also called the critic network. Its parameters ϕ is
updated via:
L(ϕ) = E(s,a,r,s′)∼U(D)[(Qϕ(x, a) −y)2],
y = r + γQϕ′(s′, a′)|a′=µθ′(s′),
(2)
where µθ′ is the target policy with delayed parameters θ′.
MADDPG [22] is a variant of DDPG for multi-agent systems,
with centralized Q-value function and decentralized policies.
Considering N agents with continuous deterministic policies
µ = {µθ1, ..., µθN }, the policy gradient for agent i is:
∇θiJ(θi) = E(x,a)∼U(D)[∇θiµθi(oi)∇aiQϕi
i (x, a)|ai=µθi(oi)].
(3)
Here, Qϕi
i (x, a) is agent i’s Q-value function, which accepts
all agents’ actions a = [a1, ..., aN] and state information x.
In this paper, x is defined as the concatenation of all agents’
observations [o1, ..., oN]. D stores tuples (x, x′, a, r1, ..., rN),
encapsulating all agents’ experiences. ϕi is updated via:
L(ϕi) = E(x,a,r,x′)∼U(D)[(Qϕi
i (x, a) −yi)2],
yi = ri + γQϕ′
i
i (x′, a′
1, ..., a′
N)|a′
j=µθ′
j (o′
j).
(4)
The DDPG and MADDPG frameworks described above form
the foundation of our method. We introduce novel fault-
tolerant mechanisms considering vehicle characteristics within
the established frameworks to address the vulnerability to
observational faults.
IV. METHODS
This section details OFT-MARL designed for the highway on-
ramp merging scenario. As illustrated in Fig. 2, the framework
is composed of the driving scenario along with two interacting
agents. The core of our approach lies in the offensive-defensive
synergy established between the fault injection agent and the
fault-tolerant vehicle agent.
Initially, a problem formulation is established (Section
IV-A), followed by the formalization of the observation model
and fault model to define the mechanism of observation
perturbations (Section IV-B). Subsequently, a fault injection
agent is introduced, which adaptively generates strategically
disruptive perturbations within bounded constraints from the
true observations and reapplies them to the scenario (Section
IV-C). The fault-tolerant vehicle agent is equipped with the
capability to leverage sequential dependencies for simultaneous
fault detection and observation reconstruction, thereby gener-
ating reliable actions (Section IV-D). Finally, all components
are integrated via a joint training framework (Section IV-E),
with details of each component depicted in Fig. 3.
A. Problem Formulation
The scenario addressed in this study is a highway on-ramp
merging configuration. Denote the fleet size by N, where
each vehicle i ∈{1, . . . , N} has a state vector si ∈Rd.
Normally, vehicle i gets true observation oi = Yi(s). However,
communication or perception faults impair observation function
Yi, affecting the accuracy of the observation and causing oi
to diverge from the ground-truth state s. To facilitate a clear
representation, we denote oi and Yi as the pristine observation
and observation function, respectively, while ˆoi and ˆYi represent
the potentially perturbed observation and observation function.
The space of all possible perturbed observations is denoted by
ˆO.
To address the problem, our methodology proceeds as
follows: first, we formally define Yi and ˆYi while constraining
the domain of ˆO; second, we introduce the fault injection
method f : O →ˆO; and finally, we articulate the policy

4
True 
Observations
Perturbated 
Observations
Perturbations
Actions
Temporal Discrimination Network 
Vehicle Policy Network 
Fault Generation Network
Fault-affected Function 
Reconstructed
Observations
1
2
Adversarial
Fault-Tolerant
Fault Injection Agent
Vehicle Agent
Scenario
Fault 
Probability 
Fig. 2: Overall framework of OFT-MARL.
µ : ˆOi →Ai that maps perturbed observations to actions.
These components collectively form the foundational issues
examined in the subsequent sections.
B. Observation Modeling under Faults
We formally define the observation model under normal and
fault conditions, and establish perturbation constraints.
Each vehicle’s policy depends primarily on neighboring ve-
hicles. To reduce computational and communication overhead,
vehicle i observes only its own state and those of m surrounding
vehicles [19], [32]. Let Ni = [N 1
i , . . . , N m
i ] be the neighbor
index array of vehicle i, where N j
i
∈{0, 1, . . . , N}, j =
1, . . . , m. The neighbor may not exist due to spatial distribution
or insufficient vehicle density, in which case we set N j
i = 0. As
depicted in Fig. 3 Top, N1 = [2, 0, 4, 3] shows the distribution
of vehicles at 4 relative positions around vehicle 1. The true
observation vector oi ∈R(m+1)d is constructed as:
oi = Yi(s) = [si, oi,1, . . . , oi,m] ,
(5)
where si is the state of vehicle i and oi,j ∈Rd is the observation
vector from vehicle i to its j-th neighbor:
oi,j =
(
0d,
N j
i = 0,
oiN j
i ,
N j
i > 0.
(6)
Here, 0d denotes a d-dimensional zero vector when neighbor
j is absent and oij is the true observation from vehicle i to
vehicle N j
i .
The observation vector considering potential faults ˆoi ∈
R(m+1)d is constructed as:
ˆoi = ˆYi(s) = [si, ˆoi,1, . . . , ˆoi,m, ] ,
(7)
where ˆoi,j is the observation vector from vehicle i to its j-th
neighbor, which may contain potential perturbations:
ˆoi,j =





0d,
N j
i = 0,
f(oiN j
i , b),
N j
i > 0 under fault condition,
oiN j
i ,
N j
i > 0 under normal condition.
(8)
Here, f(oiN j
i , b) presents the fault-affected observation. b
is the deviation magnitude, applied to the true observation
oiN j
i through fault-affected function f. The function will be
detailedly described in Section IV-C.
To bound fault magnitudes, we define an l-norm ball B(o)
[33], [34]. The perturbed observation f(o, b) should lie within
the ball centered at o:
B(o) :=

f(o, b) ∈Rd : ∥f(o, b) −o∥l ≤ϵ
	
,
(9)
where ϵ > 0 is the perturbation budget. This constraint ensures
the problem remains well-posed, as excessive perturbations
provide limited practical utility for policy decisions and are
readily detectable in real-world scenarios.
C. Adversarial Fault Injection Agent
Although fault mechanisms are defined, determining opti-
mal perturbation amplitudes across state dimensions remains
challenging. Indiscriminate random fault injection may cause
vehicles to frequently learn responses to minor faults while
remaining vulnerable to critical faults. Meanwhile, it is difficult
to manually set up valid faults, for the impact of observation
deviations on RL-based policies is challenging to analyze
theoretically. To address the problem, we introduce a global
fault injection agent that adaptively introduces disruptive faults
during training.
We impose a constraint on the fault injection agent: it
cannot arbitrarily choose which vehicle receives a faulty
observation or which neighbor’s state is perturbed. Instead,
these are randomly selected. As exemplified in Fig. 3 (Top),
it is randomly determined that the fault recipient vehicle 1
misobserves the fault target vehicle 4. After selecting fault
recipient and target vehicles, indicators presenting the fault
information and observations of all vehicles together contain
the requisite information for finding the effective perturbations
from a system-wide global perspective.
As illustrated in Fig. 3 (Middle), the workflow of the fault
injection agent involves three key steps: i) aggregating global

5
1
2
1
ො𝑜1 = [𝑠1, ො𝑜𝑖,1, ො𝑜𝑖,2, ො𝑜𝑖,3, ො𝑜𝑖,4]
ො𝑜1,1
ො𝑜1,2
ො𝑜1,4
ො𝑜1,3
2
3
4
ො𝑜1,1 = 𝑜12
Front: 𝒩11 = 2
Rear: 𝒩12 = 0
Side front: 𝒩13 = 4
Side rear:  𝒩14 = 3
ො𝑜1,3 = 𝑓𝑜14, 𝑏
ො𝑜1,2 = 𝟎
ො𝑜1,4 = 𝑜13
Observations
[𝑜1, … , 𝑜𝑁]
Indicator  𝑒tgt
Indicator  𝑒rec
𝜌𝜔
Fault Generation Network
𝑏
𝑓(𝑜𝑖𝑗, 𝑏)
Fault-affected Function
𝒢𝑔
෤𝑝𝑖, ෤𝑜𝑖
𝑎𝑖
ℎ𝑖
′
Adversarial
Fault Injection Agent
Fault-Tolerant
Vehicle Agent
𝑜𝑖𝑗
Temporal Discrimination Network
Vehicle Policy Network
𝜇𝜃
ො𝑜𝑖
DDPG
MADDPG
Scenario Illustration
Vector 
Concatenation
MLP
RNN
𝑓
Mapping 
function
Legend
𝑥
ℎ𝑖
Fig. 3: Schematic diagram of OFT-MARL. Top: Illustration of a on-ramp merging scenario case (left) and the composition
of the observation for vehicle 1 within the scenario (right). Middle: Workflow of the adversarial fault injection agent, which
takes the observations of all vehicles and two fault indicators as input, processes them through the fault generation network to
output perturbation magnitude b, and then transforms the true observation oij into fault-affected observation f(oij, b) via the
fault-affected function. Bottom: Workflow of the fault-tolerant vehicle agent, which takes potentially perturbed observation ˆoi
along with the hidden state hi from the previous timestep (via the GRU), outputs the hidden state h′
i for the next timestep,
further processes it through an MLP network to generate fault predictions ˜pi and observation estimates ˜oi, and finally combines
these with the observation ˆoi to produce acceleration action ai through the action output network.
observations and fault indicators to form the input vector
x; ii) processing x through the policy network to compute
perturbation magnitude b; and iii) using a fault-affected function
to apply b to the true observation.
Formally, the input vector x = [o1, . . . , oN, erec, etgt] con-
catenates: i) All vehicle observations oi; ii) Fault recipient
indicator erec; iii) Fault target indicator etgt. Here, erec indicates
vehicle i which gets perturbed observations and etgt indicates
vehicle N j
i which vehicle i misobserves. Both are one-hot
vectors:
erec = [δki]N
k=1 =
(
1,
k = i
0,
otherwise ,
etgt = [δkj]m
k=1 =
(
1,
k = j
0,
otherwise ,
(10)
where δki, δkj are Kronecker delta functions.
When vehicle i misobserves neighbor N j
i , the input-output
relationship is:
b = ρω(x),
(11)
where b ∈Rd0 with d0 ≤d denotes perturbations applied to d0
state dimensions of oiN j
i . Here ρ represents the fault injection
agent’s policy network with parameters ω.
In this paper, we adapt a basic add function as the fault-
affected function. The B(o) ball is a ∞-norm ball. Thus,
f(oij, b) = oij + clip (b, −ϵ, ϵ) .
(12)
Here, clip (b, −ϵ, ϵ) means each dimension of b is restricted in
[−ϵ, ϵ].
D. Fault-Tolerant Vehicle Agent
Observation perturbations pose a significant threat to vehicle
policies, particularly those based on conventional Multi-Layer
Perceptron (MLP) architectures. This vulnerability stems from
the fundamental memoryless nature of MLPs as feedforward
networks. While MLPs are well-suited for idealized fully ob-
servable Markovian environments where decisions can be made
optimally based on accurate current observations, they become
critically inadequate in the presence of faults. Specifically, they
lack the capability to detect observational faults or extract
diagnostic information from corrupted observations.

6
This inherent limitation severely compromises the safety
and operational efficiency of vehicle policies when observation
perturbations occur. Fortunately, vehicular operational data
exhibit strong spatio-temporal correlations. For instance, vehicle
kinematics are bound by physical constraints, trajectories
demonstrate continuity and smoothness, and driving behaviors
generally adhere to established traffic norms. These consistent
temporal patterns provide a viable means to mitigate perturba-
tions by enabling the discrimination of potential faults and the
reconstruction of credible observation estimates.
We therefore introduce a temporal discrimination network
to equip the fault-tolerant agent with these capabilities. This
network is implemented using a Gated Recurrent Unit (GRU),
an advanced version of RNNs that utilizes sophisticated
gating mechanisms to regulate information flow over extended
sequences. The GRU’s hidden state, which contains historical
information, precisely suits the temporal characteristics of
vehicle data. When abrupt deviations manifest in observation
streams, this network identifies compromised observation
dimensions and generates relatively reliable estimates. Aug-
menting observation vectors with these outputs significantly
enhances fault tolerance.
As illustrated in Fig. 3 (Bottom), the workflow of the
proposed fault-tolerant vehicle agent involves three steps: i)
updating the hidden state h′
i encoding historical information; ii)
generating fault probability ˜pi and the reconstructed observation
estimate ˜oi from h′
i; iii) outputting the vehicle action ai through
the policy network.
For vehicle i, the temporal discrimination network G with
parameters g operates as:
˜pi, ˜oi = Gg(ˆoi, hi),





h′
i = σ(ˆoi, hi),
˜pi = sigmoid(Wph′
i + bp),
˜oi = Woh′
i + bo.
(13)
where h′
i and hi denotes the hidden states for the next and the
current timestep, with ˜pi ∈[0, 1]m indicating fault probability
of each neighbor, and ˜oi ∈Rd0 representing the reconstructed
observation. σ denotes the GRU and sigmoid denotes the
activation function. Wp, Wo and bp, bo represents the weights
and biases of the linear layer respectively.
With the help of fault identification and observation predic-
tion, the policy network processes the augmented inputs to
output the acceleration action ai:
ai = µθ (ˆoi, ˜pi, ˜oi) ,
(14)
where µ is the policy network with parameters θ shared across
all vehicles.
E. Joint Training Framework
The joint training framework is characterized by a co-
evolutionary dynamic between the two agents. As illustrated in
Fig. 2, the fault injection agent’s perturbations directly affect the
vehicle observations, which in turn influence both the temporal
network’s estimations and the policy network’s decisions.
Conversely, the vehicle policy’s resilience against perturbations
shapes the fault injection agent’s learning objective. This co-
evolutionary process creates an offensive-defensive synergy
where each agent continuously adapts to the other’s strategies,
ultimately leading to fault-tolerant policy learning.
This synergy of the two agents is implemented through
three interconnected network components that undergo joint
optimization using distinct learning paradigms, concluded in
Table I. Within the vehicle agent, the temporal discrimination
network Gg is trained via supervised learning, while the
actor-critic architecture, comprising the policy network µθ
(actor) and critic networks {Qψi
i }N
i=1, is optimized using the
MADDPG framework. The fault injection agent employs its
own actor-critic scheme, where the actor network ρω generates
adversarial perturbations and the critic network Qϕ evaluates
their disruptive impact, both trained with DDPG.
TABLE I: Learning paradigms
Networks
Paradigm
Reason
Gg
Supervised learning
explicit supervision signals
Qψi
i , µθ
MADDPG
multi-agent cooperative policy
Qϕ, ρω
DDPG
single-agent adversarial policy
The temporal network Gg is co-trained with reinforcement
learning using supervised signals. We minimize the composite
mean squared error (MSE) between its outputs and ground-truth
references:
L(g) = E(o,ˆo,h)∼Dv

∥˜pi −pi∥2
2 +
m
X
j=1
∥˜oij −oij∥2
2

, (15)
where pi ∈{0, 1}m denotes the ground-truth fault indicator
vector.
Each vehicle possesses a dedicated critic Qψi
i
that receives
ground-truth global states o = (o1, . . . , oN) to ensure stability:
L(ψi) = E(o,a,r,o′,h′)∼Dv

Qψi
i (o, a) −yi
2
,
yi = ri + γQψ′
i
i
 o′, a′
1, . . . , a′
N

,
a′
j = µθ′(ˆo′
j, ˜p′
i, ˜o′
i),
(16)
where ψ′
i and θ′ denote target network parameters. It is worth
noting that the fault injection agent ρω is incorporated in order
to compute perturbed next observation ˆo′
j. The policy gradient
update follows:
∇θJ(θ) = E(o,ˆo,a,h)∼Dv
h
∇θµθ(ˆoi, ˜pi, ˜oi)∇aiQψi
i (o, a)
i
,
ai = µθ(ˆoi, ˜pi, ˜oi).
(17)
The fault injection agent’s objective is to maximize policy
disruption by minimizing collective rewards:
r′ = −
XN
i=1 ri.
(18)
The fault injection agent possesses a critic network Q with
parameters ϕ, updated to minimize the temporal difference
loss:
L(ϕ) = E(x,b,r′,x′)∼Df
h Qϕ(x, b) −y
2i
,
y = r′ + γQϕ′(x′, b′)|b′=ρω′(x′).
(19)

7
Algorithm 1 OFT-MARL
Require: Batch size k, replay buffers Dv (vehicle agent) and Df (fault injection agent), number of vehicles N, maximum
training episodes E, maximum steps per episode S, network update frequency K
1: Initialize step counter Total steps ←0. Randomly initialize the vehicle agent critic network Qψi
i , the vehicle agent actor
network µθ, the fault injection critic network Qϕ, the fault injection actor network ρω, and the temporal discrimination
network Gg.
2: for episode e = 1 to E do
3:
Initialize environment state, fault configuration, and GRU hidden states for all vehicles
4:
for step t = 1 to S do
5:
if fault condition is triggered then
6:
Compute perturbation: b ←ρω(x)
7:
else
8:
b ←0 (no perturbation)
9:
end if
10:
Generate perturbed observations ˆoi using Equ. (7), (8) and (12)
11:
Compute temporal features: (˜pi, ˜oi, h′
i) ←Gg(ˆoi, hi) via Equ. (13)
12:
Select actions: ai ←µθ(ˆoi, ˜pi, ˜oi) for each vehicle i
13:
Execute actions, observe next state s′ and rewards ri
14:
Store transition (x, b, r′, x′) in Df if fault has occurred
15:
Store vehicle experiences (o, ˆo, a, r, o′, h, h′) in Dv
16:
Total steps ←Total steps + 1
17:
if Total steps mod K = 0 then
18:
for vehicle i = 1 to N do
19:
Sample mini-batch of k transitions from Dv
20:
Update temporal network Gg via Equ. (15)
21:
Update critic Qψi
i
via Equ. (16)
22:
Update actor µθ via Equ. (17)
23:
end for
24:
Sample mini-batch of k transitions from Df
25:
Update fault injection critic Qϕ via Equ. (19)
26:
Update fault injection actor ρω via Equ. (20)
27:
Update target networks parameters ψ′
i, θ′, ϕ′, ω′
28:
end if
29:
Advance to next state: o ←o′, h ←h′
30:
end for
31: end for
where ϕ′ and ω′ denote target network parameters. The policy
gradient update is:
∇ωJ(ω) = Ex∼Df
h
∇ωρω(x)∇bQϕ(x, b)

b=ρω(x)
i
.
(20)
The complete algorithm is described in Algorithm 1.
V. EXPERIMENTS
A. Setup
1) Experiments Overview: This section conducts experi-
ments to validate the effectiveness of the proposed methodology.
We evaluate the contribution of each module by comparing the
performance across different experimental configurations, as
summarized in Table II.
In Subsection V-B, we justify the necessity of accounting for
potential faults. Policies are trained using vanilla MADDPG in
fault-free scenarios, and are then evaluated under both fault-free
and random fault conditions, demonstrating the importance of
enhancing fault tolerance.
TABLE II: Experimental configurations in two dimensions
Dimension
Configurations
Description
Fault
Injection
Fault-free
b = 0
Random fault
b ∼U(−ϵ, ϵ)
Adversarial fault
b = ρω(x)
Policy
Training
Vanilla MADDPG
Baseline without fault tolerance
OFT-MARL w/o GRU
Proposed method without GRU
OFT-MARL
Full proposed method
In Subsection V-C, we introduce random faults during
training for all three policy methods. Subsequently, a fault
injection agent is trained against each fixed pre-trained policy.
By comparing performance under random faults versus faults
from the fault injection agent during testing, we validate the
specific role of the proposed fault injection agent.
In Subsection V-D, all three policy methods are trained
with the proposed fault injection agent generating adversarial
faults. Policies are evaluated to verify the effectiveness of the
overall training architecture and the fault-tolerant vehicle agent.

8
Furthermore, policies are tested under diverse fault patterns to
assess the generalization capability.
In Subsection V-E, we perform an isolated analysis of the
outputs from the temporal network to further confirm its
contribution.
2) Scenario: We design a scenario modified from the
Highway Environment [35]. As depicted in Fig. 3 Top, the
highway merges consist of single-lane main road and on-
ramp with N = 4 vehicles. Each vehicle i observes m = 4
neighboring vehicles:
N 1
i : front vehicle
N 2
i : rear vehicle
N 3
i : side front vehicle
N 4
i : side rear vehicle
Thus vehicle i’s observation vector oi ∈R(4+1)×4 concatenates
its own state and relative observations of these neighbors:
oi = [ si
|{z}
ego
, oiN 1
i
|{z}
front
, oiN 2
i
|{z}
rear
, oiN 3
i
|{z}
side front
, oiN 4
i
|{z}
side rear
].
(21)
State dimensions d = 4 comprise: (a) existence Boolean, (b)
longitudinal position, (c) velocity, and (d) lane ID. Neighbor
observations use relative values for position, velocity and
lane. Since the existence and lane features are considered
unperturbable or difficult to perturb, only the relative position
and velocity can be perturbed, which means d0 = 2.
Vehicles collaborate to achieve safe and efficient merging,
with success defined as all vehicles passing a designated point.
The reward function combines:
r = −1 + rgoal + rvel + rcol,
(22)
where −1 prevents vehicles from learning overly conservative
local optimal policies, rgoal is a time-discounted task completion
bonus, rvel is the reward for maintaining appropriate velocity,
and rcol is the penalty for vehicle collision.
In order to better present the adverse effects of the faults,
we increase the randomness of the initial velocities, set strict
vehicle headway, and endow vehicles with heterogeneous
acceleration characteristics. This prevents trivialization of
decision-making tasks and ensures the necessity of the fault
tolerance of the vehicle policy.
B. Necessity of Fault tolerance
We first train vehicle policies using vanilla MADDPG
framework without considering potential faults. The training
performance is illustrated in Fig. 4 (a). During evaluation, we
test policies trained with 6 different random seeds under two
conditions: without faults and with random faults. Results in
Table 4 (b) demonstrate significant performance degradation
when random faults are introduced.
As exemplified in the test scenario of Fig. 5, the true
positions of the vehicles are depicted in green. After introducing
random faults, at timestep 9 (Fig. 5 (a)), vehicle 1 receives
corrupted observation regarding vehicle 4, falsely perceiving
its position at the red dashed bounding box. This perception
error leads to failure in recognizing the imminent collision risk
and consequently no deceleration is conducted. The collision
ultimately occurs at timestep 11 (Fig. 5 (b)), indicated by the
blue highlight.
This experiment substantiates that training processes must
account for potential observational deviations, as even random
perturbations can critically compromise performance.
0
6000
12000
18000
24000
30000
Episodes
10
8
6
4
2
0
Episode Rewards
MADDPG (fault-free)
(a)
Fault-free
Random Fault
3
2
1
0
1
Reward
0.30
-2.07
Fault-free
Random Fault
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
Collision Rate
11.3%
22.9%
(b)
Fig. 4: (a) Average reward curves for MADDPG in fault-free
scenarios. The error bar is a 95% confidence interval across
6 runs. (b) Performance decline of methods trained in fault-
free scenarios and tested under fault-free and random fault
conditions.
(a) Timestep 9
(b) Timestep 11
Fig. 5: Influence of random faults.
C. Effect of the Fault Injection Agent
To validate the efficacy of the proposed fault injection agent,
it is necessary to demonstrate that introducing merely random
faults during training is insufficient. Hence, we first train the
policy with random faults and keep it fixed. Then, we introduce

9
the fault injection agent and proceed to train this agent. As
illustrated in Fig. 6, the progressively decreasing reward curve
during training indicates that the negative impact of faults on
the vehicle policy is gradually increasing. The testing results,
summarized in Table III, show that while the collision rate
changes marginally, the task completion timesteps increase
significantly. This phenomenon occurs because the reduction
in rewards can be attributed to two primary factors: causing
vehicle collisions or impairing traffic efficiency. When the fault
injection agent targets traffic efficiency delays, the safety metric
may conversely improve. Consequently, the overall collision
rate remains relatively unchanged.
A specific scenario is analyzed, in which vehicle 4 has
perturbed observation when perceiving vehicle 2. In the first
case, shown in Fig. 7 (a) and (b), at timestep 9, the fault
injection agent biases vehicle 4’s observation of vehicle 2’s
position forward and its speed higher. This leads vehicle 4 to
perceive a much larger time headway than reality, ultimately
resulting in a collision between vehicle 2 and vehicle 4
at timestep 11. In the second case, depicted in Fig. 7 (c)
and (d), also at timestep 9, the fault injection agent acts
conversely—biasing the observed position backward and the
speed lower. Consequently, vehicle 4 decelerates to avoid a
potential collision, triggering a chain reaction where vehicles 1
and 3 also brake successively. By timestep 15, the last vehicle,
vehicle 3, finally passes the merging point, but is already
significantly behind vehicle 2, indicating markedly reduced
traffic efficiency.
The experiments in this section demonstrate that policies
trained solely with random faults possess inadequate fault
tolerance. In contrast, the fault injection agent can strategically
select the most disruptive observation perturbation based on
the specific scenario context, thereby effectively compromising
either safety or efficiency.
0
2000
4000
6000
8000
10000
Episodes
10
8
6
4
2
0
Episode Rewards
OFT-MARL
OFT-MARL w/o GRU
Vanilla MADDPG
Fig. 6: Average reward curves for training the fault injection
agent with different fixed vehicle policies. The decline in
vehicle rewards demonstrates the increasing effectiveness of the
adversarial agent. Error bars indicate 95% confidence interval
across 6 runs.
TABLE III: Performance decline of methods trained with
random faults: testing under random vs. adversarial faults
Method
Fault Condition
Reward
Collision Rate
Timesteps
Vanilla
MADDPG
Random
-1.26
21.2%
17.39
Adversarial
-4.91
18.4%
18.45
∆
3.65↓
2.8%↓
1.06↑
OFT-MARL
w/o GRU
Random
-0.49
14.4%
17.55
Adversarial
-5.56
10.6%
18.90
∆
5.07↓
3.8%↓
1.35↑
OFT-MARL
Random
-0.14
12.9%
17.54
Adversarial
-5.72
13.3%
18.86
∆
5.58↓
0.4%↑
1.32↑
∆: Performance variation between two fault conditions
(a) Case 1: timestep 9
(b) Case 1: timestep 11
(c) Case 2: timestep 9
(d) Case 2: timestep 15
Fig. 7: Influence of adversarial faults introduced by the
fault injection agent on fleet behavior. (a)-(b) Case 1: Safety
compromise. (c)-(d) Case 2: Efficiency degradation.
D. Training of Fault-tolerant Policies
Having verified the efficacy of the fault injection agent,
we employ it to generate adversarial faults during training,
concurrently training both the agent and the vehicle policies.
Under identical fault injection conditions, we compare the
performance of different methods. As shown in Fig. 8, the
standard MADDPG achieves the highest reward in the absence
of faults. In contrast, vanilla MADDPG yields the poorest
reward, as it fails to account for the impact of observation

10
deviations on the accuracy of both critics and actors during
training. OFT-MARL w/o GRU builds upon vanilla MADDPG
by adopting advanced training strategy of critics and actors
according to Alg. 1. This modification leads to a substantial
improvement in the performance of the trained vehicle policies.
Furthermore, the proposed OFT-MARL introduces a temporal
network that assists the policy network in detecting faults
and estimating true observations from corrupted observations
by leveraging historical information. This architecture further
enhances the performance of OFT-MARL, enabling it to
approach the performance of standard MADDPG under fault-
free conditions.
As indicated by the test results in Table IV, OFT-MARL out-
performs other methods across all metrics, and its performance
is close to that achieved in the fault-free scenario. These results
demonstrate that the proposed method effectively mitigates the
harmful effects of observation perturbations. Even when the
fault injection agent deliberately introduces adversarial faults,
OFT-MARL maintains performance levels comparable to those
under fault-free conditions.
0
6000
12000
18000
24000
30000
Episodes
10
8
6
4
2
0
Episode Rewards
OFT-MARL
OFT-MARL w/o GRU
Vanilla MADDPG
MADDPG (fault-free)
Fig. 8: Average reward curves for 3 methods trained with the
fault injection agent and for MADDPG without considering
faults. Error bars indicate 95% confidence interval across 6
runs.
TABLE IV: Performance comparison of methods trained with
adversarial faults
Method
Reward
Collision Rate
Timesteps
MADDPG (fault-free)
0.30
11.3%
17.52
Vanilla MADDPG
−2.36
22.9%
17.61
OFT-MARL w/o GRU
−1.07
15.1%
17.65
OFT-MARL
−0.38
12.5%
17.60
To evaluate the generalization capability of each method
under diverse fault conditions, we select the best-performing
policy from 6 random seeds for each approach and test it
against multiple fault injection strategies. The fault injection
methodologies encompassed: (1) fault-free conditions, (2)
random faults, (3) faults generated by fault injection agents
trained with the three vehicle policy training methods, and (4)
faults generated by retrained fault injection agents with fixed
vehicle policies.
As demonstrated in Table V, the proposed OFT-MARL main-
tains fault-tolerant performance across various fault patterns,
demonstrating generalization capability beyond its training-
specific fault pattern. Notably, even when confronted with
adversarially retrained fault injection policies targeting the fixed
vehicle policy, the performance degradation remains marginal.
The observed performance reduction is substantially smaller
compared to the results presented in Table III. These findings
collectively indicate that OFT-MARL exhibits considerable
resilience against diverse fault patterns.
E. Analysis of Vehicle Agent’s Fault-Diagnosis Capability
To gain deeper insights into how the fault-tolerant mechanism
within our vehicle agent contributes to enhancing fault tolerance,
we conduct an independent analysis of the temporal network’s
fault-diagnosis outputs. First, we examine the accuracy of the
temporal network in fault detection. Since the network outputs
probability values and the dataset exhibits class imbalance, we
binarize the predictions using a threshold of 0.5 to construct
the confusion matrix. As shown in Table VI, based on
69456 judgments collected over 1000 episodes, the network
successfully identifies fault states 9296 times and correctly
classifies normal states 59711 times. There are 412 instances
where fault states are misclassified as normal, and 37 instances
where normal states are falsely identified as faulty. This results
in an accuracy of 99.3%, a precision of 99.6%, and a recall of
95.8%.
Subsequently, we evaluate the accuracy of the temporal
network in predicting true observations from corrupted ob-
servations. The results presented in Table VII demonstrate
that the network can effectively recover significant original
observation errors to an acceptable level of prediction loss.
For instance, considering the mean absolute error (MAE) of
position estimation, the fault injection agent introduces an
average position deviation of 9.10 m between observed and
true values. The temporal network reduces this error to 3.36 m,
corresponding to a 63.1% error correction. Recovery rates also
exceed 50% among other metrics. The high accuracy in fault
detection and the significant error reduction in observation
estimation directly explain why the vehicle agent maintains
high performance under faults. By providing reliable fault alerts
and corrected state references, the temporal network empowers
the policy network to make safer and more efficient decisions.
To exhibit the performance of fault-tolerant mechanism under
different fault patterns, we examine two representative cases
as shown in Fig. 9.
Case 1 investigates the network’s response to abrupt state
changes. At timestep 4, vehicle 2 observes a sudden forward
position shift of 6.0 m in vehicle 3. The network immediately
detects this anomaly with high probability and generates a
predicted position 0.8 m ahead of the actual position, indicated
by the purple rectangle.
Case 2 examines the network’s capability in handling
gradual state deviations. Starting from timestep 4, vehicle
2’s observations of vehicle 3 exhibit progressively increasing

11
TABLE V: Generalization performance evaluation under various fault injection conditions.
Test Condition
OFT-MARL
OFT-MARL w/o GRU
Vanilla MADDPG
Reward
Collision Rate
Timesteps
Reward
Collision Rate
Timesteps
Reward
Collision Rate
Timesteps
Fault-free
1.12
2.4%
17.67
0.29
10.1%
17.51
-0.12
13.1%
17.47
Random fault
-0.63
10.4%
17.73
-1.34
19.0%
17.52
-1.44
19.6%
17.49
OFT-MARL fault
0.17
6.8%
17.70
-0.71
14.6%
17.57
-1.38
18.5%
17.53
OFT-MARL w/o GRU fault
-1.14
8.7%
17.90
-0.88
13.2%
17.67
-2.12
15.9%
17.83
Vanilla MADDPG fault
-0.32
8.2%
17.74
-1.33
17.8%
17.58
-1.07
17.6%
17.51
Retrained fault
-1.63
10.1%
17.97
-2.32
15.2%
17.93
-5.21
21.6%
18.36
TABLE VI: Confusion matrix of fault detection results
Predicted
Total
Fault
Normal
Actual
Fault
9296
412
9708
Normal
37
59711
59748
Total
9333
60123
69456
TABLE VII: Observation Prediction Recovery Percentage
Position (m)
Velocity (m/s)
MAE
MSE
MAE
MSE
Original
9.10
86.68
3.46
12.83
Prediction
3.36
19.22
1.45
3.22
Recovery
63.1%
77.8%
58.1%
74.9%
errors: position deviation increases by 1.0 m per timestep
and velocity deviation by 0.40 m/s per timestep. Although
the observation prediction remains accurate at timestep 4,
the network fails to initially identify the fault due to minor
deviations. However, as vehicle 3 continues to accelerate in
vehicle 2’s view, which contradicts the normal driving pattern,
the temporal network gradually increases its fault probability
assessment. At timestep 7, vehicle 2 successfully identifies the
fault. The observed position and velocity contain a 4.0 m and
1.60 m/s forward error respectively. The network’s predictions
substantially correct these deviations, reducing the position
error to 1.4 m and the velocity error to 0.36 m/s.
In both scenarios shown in panels (b) and (d), without the
diagnostic capability, vehicle 2 would misinterpret vehicle
3’s behavior as aggressive positioning and potentially initiate
unnecessary deceleration. This could either cause collisions
with actually positioned vehicles or significantly increase
traffic delay. Equipped with our fault-tolerant design, vehicle 2
correctly maintains speed and safely precedes vehicle 3 through
the conflict point.
VI. CONCLUSION
This paper highlights the severe impact of observation
perturbations on the safety and efficiency of MARL-based
cooperative driving systems. To address this, we introduce a
fault-tolerant MARL framework integrating an adaptive fault
injection agent and a fault-tolerant vehicle agent. The fault
injection agent actively generates challenging perturbations
during training, exposing agents to critical faults and enhancing
(a) Case 1: timestep 4
(b) Case 1: timestep 9
(c) Case 2: timestep 4
(d) Case 2: timestep 7
Fig. 9: Exhibition of the vehicle’s fault-diagnosis capability in
mitigating different fault patterns. (a)-(b) Case 1: Response to
an abrupt position shift. (c)-(d) Case 2: Response to progressive
deviations.
fault tolerance. The vehicle agent is equipped with the capability
to detect faults and reconstruct credible observation estimates
by leveraging spatio-temporal vehicle data. Experimental results
in highway on-ramp merging scenarios confirm that our ap-
proach significantly outperforms vanilla MADDPG and ablated
variants under both random and adversarial fault conditions.
It nearly matches the performance of fault-free systems while
maintaining strong generalization across unseen fault patterns.
The temporal network achieves high fault detection accuracy
and substantially corrects observation errors.
In future research, the applicability of the method across

12
diverse scenarios can be investigated. Moreover, it can be
integrated with safety verification modules to ensure the
security of vehicle policies. Additionally, more data credibility
assessment methods, such as incorporating driving habits
factors, could be fused into the vehicle agent to enhance
fault detection and observation prediction capabilities for
heterogeneous vehicles.
REFERENCES
[1] H. Xu, S. Feng, Y. Zhang, and L. Li, “A grouping-based cooperative
driving strategy for cavs merging problems,” IEEE Transactions on
Vehicular Technology, vol. 68, no. 6, pp. 6125–6136, 2019.
[2] H. Pei, Y. Zhang, Q. Tao, S. Feng, and L. Li, “Distributed cooperative
driving in multi-intersection road networks,” IEEE Transactions on
Vehicular Technology, vol. 70, no. 6, pp. 5390–5403, 2021.
[3] H. Pei, Y. Zhang, Y. Zhang, and S. Feng, “Optimal cooperative driving
at signal-free intersections with polynomial-time complexity,” IEEE
Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems, vol. 23, no. 8, pp.
12 908–12 920, 2022.
[4] H. Yu, W. Yang, J. Zhong, Z. Yang, S. Fan, P. Luo, and Z. Nie, “End-to-
end autonomous driving through v2x cooperation,” Proceedings of the
AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, vol. 39, no. 9, pp. 9598–9606,
Apr. 2025.
[5] H. Domajnko, “A review of fault types and analytical and hard-
ware redundancy for the sensor functional safety.” Electrotechnical
Review/Elektrotehniski Vestnik, vol. 91, 2024.
[6] W. Shi, M. B. Alawieh, X. Li, H. Yu, N. Arechiga, and N. Tomatsu, “Ef-
ficient statistical validation of machine learning systems for autonomous
driving,” in 2016 IEEE/ACM International Conference on Computer-
Aided Design (ICCAD), 2016, pp. 1–8.
[7] S. Wang, “An analytical framework for modeling and synthesizing
malicious attacks on adaptive cruise control vehicles,” Transportation
Research Record, vol. 2679, no. 5, pp. 142–156, 2025.
[8] Y. Feng, S. Huang, Q. A. Chen, H. X. Liu, and Z. M. Mao, “Vulner-
ability of traffic control system under cyberattacks with falsified data,”
Transportation research record, vol. 2672, no. 1, pp. 1–11, 2018.
[9] B. R. Kiran, I. Sobh, V. Talpaert, P. Mannion, A. A. A. Sallab,
S. Yogamani, and P. P´erez, “Deep reinforcement learning for autonomous
driving: A survey,” IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation
Systems, vol. 23, no. 6, pp. 4909–4926, 2022.
[10] E. M. Mianji, M. Fardad, G.-M. Muntean, and I. Tal, “A survey on multi-
agent reinforcement learning applications in the internet of vehicles,” in
2024 IEEE 99th Vehicular Technology Conference (VTC2024-Spring),
2024, pp. 1–7.
[11] Y. Lv, J. Lei, and P. Yi, “A local information aggregation-based multiagent
reinforcement learning for robot swarm dynamic task allocation,” IEEE
Transactions on Neural Networks and Learning Systems, 2025.
[12] L. Canese, G. C. Cardarilli, L. Di Nunzio, R. Fazzolari, D. Giardino,
M. Re, and S. Span`o, “Multi-agent reinforcement learning: A review of
challenges and applications,” Applied Sciences, vol. 11, no. 11, 2021.
[13] Y. Shi, H. Pei, L. Feng, Y. Zhang, and D. Yao, “Toward fault tolerance in
multi-agent reinforcement learning,” IEEE Transactions on Automation
Science and Engineering, vol. 22, pp. 19 007–19 024, 2025.
[14] A. Gleave, M. Dennis, C. Wild, N. Kant, S. Levine, and S. Russell,
“Adversarial policies: Attacking deep reinforcement learning,” in Interna-
tional Conference on Learning Representations, 2020.
[15] H. Pei, S. Feng, Y. Zhang, and D. Yao, “A cooperative driving strategy for
merging at on-ramps based on dynamic programming,” IEEE Transactions
on Vehicular Technology, vol. 68, no. 12, pp. 11 646–11 656, 2019.
[16] K. Long, Z. Gao, Z. Jiang, C. Ma, J. Hu, and X. Yang, “Optimization
based trajectory planner for multilane roundabouts with connected
automation,” Journal of Intelligent Transportation Systems, vol. 27, no. 3,
pp. 411–422, 2023.
[17] M. Zhang, C. Wang, W. Zhao, J. Liu, and Z. Zhang, “A multi-vehicle self-
organized cooperative control strategy for platoon formation in connected
environment,” IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems,
vol. 26, no. 3, pp. 4002–4018, 2025.
[18] Q. Wang, D. Tian, X. Duan, G. Qi, J. Zhou, and D. Zhao, “Efficient and
energy-saving cooperative motion planning for multiple connected and
autonomous vehicles at unsignalized intersections,” IEEE Transactions
on Intelligent Transportation Systems, vol. 26, no. 6, pp. 7921–7938,
2025.
[19] D. Chen, M. R. Hajidavalloo, Z. Li, K. Chen, Y. Wang, L. Jiang,
and Y. Wang, “Deep multi-agent reinforcement learning for highway
on-ramp merging in mixed traffic,” IEEE Transactions on Intelligent
Transportation Systems, vol. 24, no. 11, pp. 11 623–11 638, 2023.
[20] J. Pan, T. Wang, C. Claudel, and J. Shi, “Trust-marl: Trust-based multi-
agent reinforcement learning framework for cooperative on-ramp merging
control in heterogeneous traffic flow,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.12600,
2025.
[21] S. Chen, J. Dong, P. Ha, Y. Li, and S. Labi, “Graph neural network
and reinforcement learning for multi-agent cooperative control of con-
nected autonomous vehicles,” Computer-Aided Civil and Infrastructure
Engineering, vol. 36, no. 7, pp. 838–857, 2021.
[22] R. Lowe, Y. Wu, A. Tamar, J. Harb, P. Abbeel, and I. Mordatch, “Multi-
agent actor-critic for mixed cooperative-competitive environments,” in
Proceedings of the 31st International Conference on Neural Information
Processing Systems, ser. NIPS’17.
Red Hook, NY, USA: Curran
Associates Inc., 2017, pp. 6382–6393.
[23] H. Pei, J. Zhang, Y. Zhang, X. Pei, S. Feng, and L. Li, “Fault-tolerant
cooperative driving at signal-free intersections,” IEEE Transactions on
Intelligent Vehicles, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 121–134, 2023.
[24] Z. He, J. Zhang, H. Pei, L. Feng, and D. Yao, “Communication fault-
tolerant cooperative driving at on-ramps: A global planning and local
gaming strategy,” in 2024 IEEE Intelligent Vehicles Symposium (IV).
IEEE, 2024, pp. 1165–1170.
[25] Q. Liu, J. Zhang, W. Zhong, Z. Li, X. J. Ban, S. Li, and L. Li,
“Fault-tolerant cooperative driving at highway on-ramps considering
communication failure,” Transportation research part C: emerging
technologies, vol. 153, p. 104227, 2023.
[26] M. Ma and Z. Li, “A time-independent trajectory optimization approach
for connected and autonomous vehicles under reservation-based inter-
section control,” Transportation Research Interdisciplinary Perspectives,
vol. 9, p. 100312, 2021.
[27] X. He, H. Yang, Z. Hu, and C. Lv, “Robust lane change decision making
for autonomous vehicles: An observation adversarial reinforcement
learning approach,” IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Vehicles, vol. 8,
no. 1, pp. 184–193, 2023.
[28] X. He, B. Lou, H. Yang, and C. Lv, “Robust decision making for
autonomous vehicles at highway on-ramps: A constrained adversarial
reinforcement learning approach,” IEEE Transactions on Intelligent
Transportation Systems, vol. 24, no. 4, pp. 4103–4113, 2023.
[29] M. L. Littman, “Markov games as a framework for multi-agent rein-
forcement learning,” in Machine learning proceedings 1994, 1994, pp.
157–163.
[30] L. P. Kaelbling, M. L. Littman, and A. R. Cassandra, “Planning and
acting in partially observable stochastic domains,” Artificial intelligence,
vol. 101, no. 1-2, pp. 99–134, 1998.
[31] T. Lilicrap, J. Hunt, A. Pritzel, N. Hess, T. Erez, D. Silver, Y. Tassa, and
D. Wiestra, “Continuous control with deep reinforcement learning,” in
International Conference on Learning Representations, 2016.
[32] S. Han, S. Zhou, J. Wang, L. Pepin, C. Ding, J. Fu, and F. Miao, “A multi-
agent reinforcement learning approach for safe and efficient behavior
planning of connected autonomous vehicles,” IEEE Transactions on
Intelligent Transportation Systems, vol. 25, no. 5, pp. 3654–3670, 2024.
[33] H. Zhang, H. Chen, C. Xiao, B. Li, M. Liu, D. Boning, and C.-J. Hsieh,
“Robust deep reinforcement learning against adversarial perturbations on
state observations,” Advances in neural information processing systems,
vol. 33, pp. 21 024–21 037, 2020.
[34] S. He, S. Han, S. Su, S. Han, S. Zou, and F. Miao, “Robust multi-agent
reinforcement learning with state uncertainty,” Transactions on Machine
Learning Research, 2023.
[35] E. Leurent, “An environment for autonomous driving decision-making,”
https://github.com/eleurent/highway-env, 2018.
