The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-19)
Robust Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning
via Minimax Deep Deterministic Policy Gradient
Shihui Li,† Yi Wu,‡ Xinyue Cui,§ Honghua Dong,§ Fei Fang,† Stuart Russell‡
†Carnegie Mellon University, {shihuil,feifang}@cmu.edu
‡University of California, Berkeley, {jxwuyi,russell}@eecs.berkeley.edu
§Tsinghua University, {cuixy14,dhh14}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
Abstract
Despite the recent advances of deep reinforcement learning
(DRL), agents trained by DRL tend to be brittle and sensitive
to the training environment, especially in the multi-agent sce-
narios. In the multi-agent setting, a DRL agent’s policy can
easily get stuck in a poor local optima w.r.t. its training part-
ners – the learned policy may be only locally optimal to other
agents’ current policies. In this paper, we focus on the problem
of training robust DRL agents with continuous actions in the
multi-agent learning setting so that the trained agents can still
generalize when its opponents’ policies alter. To tackle this
problem, we proposed a new algorithm, MiniMax Multi-agent
Deep Deterministic Policy Gradient (M3DDPG) with the fol-
lowing contributions: (1) we introduce a minimax extension of
the popular multi-agent deep deterministic policy gradient al-
gorithm (MADDPG), for robust policy learning; (2) since the
continuous action space leads to computational intractability
in our minimax learning objective, we propose Multi-Agent Ad-
versarial Learning (MAAL) to efﬁciently solve our proposed
formulation. We empirically evaluate our M3DDPG algorithm
in four mixed cooperative and competitive multi-agent envi-
ronments and the agents trained by our method signiﬁcantly
outperforms existing baselines.
1. Introduction
Most real-world problems involve interactions between mul-
tiple agents and the complexity of problem increases sig-
niﬁcantly when the agents co-evolve together. Thanks to
the recent advances of deep reinforcement learing (DRL)
on single agent scenarios, which led to successes in play-
ing Atari game (Mnih et al. 2015), playing go (Silver
et al. 2016) and robotics control (Levine et al. 2016), it
has been a rising trend to adapt single agent DRL algo-
rithms to multi-agent learning scenarios and many works
have shown great successes on a variety of problems, in-
cluding automatic discovery of communication and lan-
guage (Sukhbaatar, Fergus, and others 2016; Mordatch
and Abbeel 2017), multiplayer games (Peng et al. 2017a;
OpenAI 2018), trafﬁc control (Wu et al. 2017) and the analy-
sis of social dilemmas (Leibo et al. 2017).
The critical challenge when adapting classical single agent
DRL algorithms to multi-agent setting is the training instabil-
Copyright c⃝2019, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
ity issue: as training progresses, each agent’s policy is chang-
ing and therefore the environment becomes non-stationary
from the perspective of any individual agent (in a way that is
not explainable by changes in the agent’s own policy). This
non-stationary problem can cause signiﬁcant problems when
directly applying the single agent DRL algorithms, for exam-
ple, the variance of the policy gradient can be exponentially
large when the number of agents increases (Lowe et al. 2017).
To handle this instability issue, recent works, such as the
counterfactual multi-agent policy gradients (Foerster et al.
2017) and the Multi-Agent Deep Deterministic Policy Gra-
dient (MADDPG) (Lowe et al. 2017), proposed to utilized a
centralized critic within the actor-critic learning framework
to reduce the variance of policy gradient.
Despite the fact that using a centralized critic stabilizes
training, the learned policies can still be brittle and sensi-
tive to its training partners and converge to a poor local
mode. This is particularly severe for competitive environ-
ments: when the opponents alter their policies during testing,
the performance of the learned policies can be drastically
worse (Lazaridou, Peysakhovich, and Baroni 2016). Hence,
a robust policy becomes desirable in multi-agent setting: a
well-trained agent should be able behave well in testing when
competing against opponents even with strategies different
from its training partners.
In this work, we focus on robust multi-agent reinforcement
learning with continuous action spaces and propose a novel
algorithm, MiniMax Multi-agent Deep Deterministic Policy
Gradient (M3DDPG). M3DDPG is a minimax extension1 of
the MADDPG algorithm (Lowe et al. 2017). Its core idea is
that during training, we force each agent to behave well even
when its training opponents response in the worst way.
Our major contributions are summarized as follow:
• We introduce the minimax approach to robust multi-agent
DRL and propose a novel minimax learning objective
based on the MADDPG algorithm;
• In order to efﬁciently optimize the minimax learning objec-
tive, we propose an end-to-end learning approach, Multi-
agent Adversarial Learning (MAAL), which is inspired by
1In fact, we are dealing with gains, i.e., maximizing each agent’s
accumulative reward, so the “minimax” here is essentially “max-
imin”. We keep the term “minimax” to be consistent with literature.
4213

the adversarial training (Goodfellow, Shlens, and Szegedy
2014) technique.
• We empirically evaluate our proposed M3DDPG algorithm
on four mixed cooperative and competitive environments
and the agents trained by M3DDPG outperform baseline
policies on all these environments.
In the rest of the paper, we will ﬁrstly present related works
in section 2. Notations and standard algorithms are described
in section 3. Our main algorithm, M3DDPG, is introduced in
section 4. Experimental results are in section 5.
2. Related Work
Multi-agent reinforcement learning (Littman 1994) has been
a long-standing ﬁeld in AI (Hu, Wellman, and others 1998;
Busoniu, Babuska, and De Schutter 2008). Recent works in
DRL use deep neural networks to approximately represent
policy and value functions. Inspired by the success of DRL
in single-agent settings, many DRL-based multi-agent learn-
ing algorithms have been proposed. Forester et al. (2016b)
and He et al. (2016) extended the deep Q-learning to multi-
agent setting; Peng et al. (2017a) proposed a centralized pol-
icy learning algorithm based on actor-critic policy gradient;
Forester et al. (2016a) developed a decentralized multi-agent
policy gradient algorithm with centralized baseline; Lowe et
al. (2017) extended DDPG to multi-agent setting with a cen-
tralized Q function; Wei et al. (2018) and Grau-Moya (2018)
proposed multi-agent variants of the soft-Q-learning algo-
rithm (Haarnoja et al. 2017); Yang et al. (2018) focused on
multi-agent reinforcement learning on a very large population
of agents. Our M3DDPG algorithm is built on top of MAD-
DPG and inherits the decentralized policy and centralized
critic framework.
Minimax is a fundamental concept in game theory and
can be applied to general decision-making under uncertainty,
prescribing a strategy that minimizes the possible loss for
a worst case scenario (Osborne and others 2004). Minimax
was ﬁrstly introduced to multi-agent reinforcement learning
as minimax Q-learning by Littman (1994). More recently,
some works combine the minimax framework and the DRL
techniques to ﬁnd Nash equilibrium in two player zero-sum
games (Foerster et al. 2018; P´erolat et al. 2016; Grau-Moya,
Leibfried, and Bou-Ammar 2018). In our work, we utilize
the minimax idea for the purpose of robust policy learning.
Robust reinforcement learning was originally introduced
by Morimoto et al. (2005) considering the generalization
ability of the learned policy in the single-agent setting. This
problem is also studied recently with deep neural networks,
such as adding random noise to input (Tobin et al. 2017) or
dynamics (Peng et al. 2017b) during training. Besides adding
random noise, some other works implicitly adopt the mini-
max idea by utilizing the “worst noise” (Pinto et al. 2017;
Mandlekar et al. 2017). These works force the learned pol-
icy to work well even under the worst case perturbations
and are typically under the name of “adversarial reinforce-
ment learning”, despite the fact that the original adversarial
reinforcement learning problem was introduced in the set-
ting of multi-agent learning (Uther and Veloso 1997). In our
M3DDPG algorithm, we focus on the problem of learning
polices that is robust to opponents with different strategies.
Within the minimax framework, ﬁnding the worst case
scenario is a critical component. Lanctot et al. (2017) pro-
posed an iterative approach that alternatively computes the
best response policy while ﬁxes the other. Gao et al. (Gao,
Mueller, and Hayward 2018) replace “mean” in the tempo-
ral difference learning rule with “minimum”. In our work,
we proposed MAAL, which is a general, efﬁcient and fully
end-to-end learning approach. MAAL is motivated by ad-
versarial training (Goodfellow, Shlens, and Szegedy 2014)
and suitable for arbitrary number of agents. The core idea
of MAAL is approximating the minimization in our min-
max objective by a single gradient descent step. The idea of
one-step-gradient approximation was also explored in meta-
learning (Finn, Abbeel, and Levine 2017).
3. Background and Preliminary
In this section, we describe our problem setting and the stan-
dard algorithms. Most of the deﬁnitions and notations follow
the original MADDPG paper (Lowe et al. 2017).
Markov Games
We consider a multi-agent extension of Markov decision pro-
cesses (MDPs) called partially observable Markov games
(Littman 1994). A Markov game for N agents is deﬁned by
a set of states S describing the possible conﬁgurations of all
agents, a set of actions A1, ..., AN and a set of observations
O1, ..., ON for each agent. To choose actions, each agent
i uses a stochastic policy πθi : Oi × Ai 7→[0, 1] param-
eterized by θi, which produces the next state according to
the state transition function T : S × A1 × ... × AN 7→S.
Each agent i obtains rewards as a function of the state and
agent’s action ri : S × Ai 7→R, and receives a private
observation correlated with the state oi : S 7→Oi. The ini-
tial states are determined by a distribution ρ : S 7→[0, 1].
Each agent i aims to maximize its own total expected return
Ri = PT
t=0 γtrt
i where γ is a discount factor and T is the
time horizon.
To minimize notation, in the following discussion we will
often omit θ from the subscript of π.
Q-Learning and Deep Q-Networks (DQN)
Q-Learning and DQN (Mnih et al. 2015) are popular methods
in reinforcement learning and have been previously applied
to multi-agent settings (Foerster et al. 2016a; Tesauro 2004).
Q-Learning makes use of an action-value function for policy
π as Qπ(s, a) = E[R|st = s, at = a]. This Q function
can be recursively rewritten as Qπ(s, a) = Es′[r(s, a) +
γEa′∼π[Qπ(s′, a′)]]. DQN learns the action-value function
Q∗corresponding to the optimal policy by minimizing:
L(θ) = Es,a,r,s′[(Q∗(s, a|θ) −y)2],
(1)
where
y = r + γ max
a′
¯Q∗(s′, a′).
¯Q is a target Q function whose parameters are periodically
updated with the most recent θ, which helps stabilize learning.
Another crucial component of stabilizing DQN is the use of
4214

an experience replay buffer D containing tuples (s, a, r, s′).
Q-learning algorithm is most suitable for DRL agents with
discrete action spaces.
Policy Gradient (PG) Algorithms
Policy gradient methods is another popular choice for a va-
riety of RL tasks. Let ρπ denote discounted state visitation
distribution for a policy π. The main idea of PG is to directly
adjust the parameters θ of the policy in order to maximize the
objective J(θ) = Es∼ρπ,a∼πθ[R] by taking steps in the direc-
tion of ∇θJ(θ). Using the Q function deﬁned previously, the
gradient of the policy can be written as (Sutton et al. 2000):
∇θJ(θ) = Es∼ρπ,a∼πθ[∇θ logπθ(a|s)Qπ(s, a)],
(2)
where pπ is the state distribution. The policy gradient theorem
has given rise to several practical algorithms, which often
differ in how they estimate Qπ. For example, one can simply
use a sample return Rt = PT
i=t γi−tri, which leads to the
REINFORCE algorithm (Williams 1992). Alternatively, one
could learn an approximation of the true action-value function
Qπ(s, a) called the critic and leads to a variety of actor-critic
algorithms (Sutton and Barto 1998).
Deterministic Policy Gradient (DPG) Algorithms
DPG algorithms extends the policy gradient algorithm to
deterministic policies µθ : S 7→A (Silver et al. 2014). In
particular, under certain conditions we can write the gradient
of the objective J(θ) = Es∼ρµ[R(s, a)] as:
∇θJ(θ) = Es∼D[∇θµθ(s)∇aQµ(s, a)|a=µθ(s)],
(3)
where D is the replay buffer. Since this theorem relies on
∇aQµ(s, a), it requires the action space A (and thus the
policy µ) be continuous.
Deep deterministic policy gradient (DDPG) (Lillicrap et
al. 2015) is a variant of DPG where the policy µ and critic
Qµ are approximated with deep neural networks. DDPG
is an off-policy algorithm, and samples trajectories from
a replay buffer of experiences that are stored throughout
training. DDPG also makes use of a target network, as in
DQN (Mnih et al. 2015).
Multi-Agent Deep Deterministic Policy Gradient
Directly applying single-agent RL algorithms to the multi-
agent setting by treating other agents as part of the envi-
ronment is problematic as the environment appears non-
stationary from the view of any one agent, violating Markov
assumptions required for convergence. This non-stationary
issue is more severe in the case of DRL with neural networks
as function approximators. The core idea of the MADDPG
algorithm (Lowe et al. 2017) is learning a centralized Q func-
tion for each agent which conditions on global information
to alleviate the non-stationary problem and stabilize training.
More concretely, consider a game with N agents with
policies parameterized by θ = {θ1, ..., θN}, and let µ =
{µ1, ...,µN} be the set of all agents’ policies. Then we can
write the gradient of the expected return for agent i with
policy µi, J(θi) = E[Ri] as:
∇θiJ(θi) =
Ex,a∼D[∇θiµi(oi)∇aiQµ
i (x, a1, ..., aN)|ai=µi(oi)] ,
(4)
Here Qπ
i (x, a1, ..., aN) is a centralized action-value func-
tion that takes as input the actions of all agents, a1, . . . , aN,
in addition to some state information x (i.e., x
=
(o1, ..., oN)) , and outputs the Q-value for agent i. Let
x′ denote the next state from x after taking actions
a1, . . . , aN. The experience replay buffer D contains the tu-
ples (x, x′, a1, . . . , aN, r1, . . . , rN), recording experiences
of all agents. The centralized action-value function Qµ
i is
updated as:
L(θi) = Ex,a,r,x′[(Qµ
i (x, a1, . . . , aN) −y)2],
(5)
y = ri + γ Qµ′
i (x′, a′
1, . . . , a′
N)

a′
j=µ′
j(oj),
where µ′ = {µθ′
1, ...,µθ′
N } is the set of target policies with
delayed parameters θ′
i.
Note that the centralized Q function is only used during
training. During decentralized execution, each policy µθi
only takes local information oi to produce an action.
4. Minimax Multi-Agent Deep Deterministic
Policy Gradient (M3DDPG)
In this section, we introduce our proposed new algorithm,
Minimax Multi-agent Deep Deterministic Policy Gradient
(M3DDPG), which is built on top of the MADDPG algo-
rithm and particularly designed to improve the robustness
of learned policies. Our M3DDPG algorithm contains two
major novel components:
Minimax Optimization Motivated by the minimax concept
in game theory, we introduce minimax optimization into
the learning objective;
Multi-Agent Adversarial Learning The continuous action
space results in computational intractability issue when op-
timizing our proposed minimax objective. Hence, we pro-
pose Multi-Agent Adversarial Learning (MAAL) to solve
this optimization problem.
Minimax Optimization
In multi-agent RL, the agents’ policies can be very sensitive
to their learning partner’s policy. Particularly in competitive
environments, the learned policies can be brittle when the
opponents alter their strategies. For the purpose of learning
robust policies, we propose to update policies considering
the worst situation: during training, we optimize the accu-
mulative reward for each agent i under the assumption that
all other agents acts adversarially. This yields the minimax
learning objective maxθi JM(θi) where
JM(θi) = Es∼ρµ [Ri]
= min
at
j̸=i
Es∼ρµ
" T
X
t=0
γt ri(st, at
1, . . . , at
N)

at
i=µ(ot
i)
#
(6)
= Es0∼ρ
"
min
a0
j̸=i
Qµ
M,i(s0, a0
1, . . . , a0
N)

a0
i =µ(o0
i )
#
.
(7)
4215

Critically, in Eq. 6, state st+1 at time t + 1 depends not only
on the dynamics ρµ and the action µi(ot
i) but also on all the
previous adversarial actions at′
j̸=i with t′ ≤t. In Eq. 7, we
derive the modiﬁed Q function Qµ
M(s, a1, . . . , aN), which is
naturally centralized and can be rewritten in a recursive form
Qµ
M,i (s, a1, . . . , aN) = ri(s, a1, . . . , aN)+
γEs′
"
min
a′
j̸=i
Qµ
M,i (s′, a′
1, . . . , a′
N)

a′
i=µi(s′)
#
.
(8)
Importantly, Qµ
M(s, a1, . . . , aN) conditions on the current
state s as well as the current actions a1, . . . , aN and repre-
sents the current reward plus the discounted worst case future
return starting from the next state, s′. This deﬁnition brings
the beneﬁts that we can naturally apply off-policy temporal
difference learning later to derive the update rule for Qµ
M.
Note that for each agent i, none of the adversarial actions
depend on its parameter θi, so we can directly apply the deter-
ministic policy gradient theorem to compute ∇θiJM(θi) and
use off-policy temporal difference to update the Q function.
Thanks to the centralized Q function in MADDPG (Eq. 4),
which takes in the actions from all the agents, our derivation
naturally applies and is perfectly aligned with the MADDPG
formulation (Eq. 4) by injecting a minimization over other
agents’ actions as follows:
∇θiJM(θi) =
Ex∼D


∇θiµi(oi)∇aiQµ
M,i(x, a⋆
1, . . . , ai, . . . a⋆
N)

ai = µi(oi)
a⋆
j̸=i = arg minaj̸=i Qµ
M,i(x, a1, . . . , aN)

,
(9)
where D denotes the replay buffer and x denotes the state
information.
Correspondingly, we obtain the new Q function update rule
by adding another minimization to Eq. 5 when computing
the target Q value:
L(θi) = Ex,a,r,x′∼D[(Qµ
M,i(x, a1, . . . , aN) −y)2], (10)
y = ri + γ Qµ′
M,i(x′, a′⋆
1, . . . , a′
i, . . . , a′⋆
N)
a′
i = µ′
i(oi),
a′⋆
j̸=i = arg min
a′
j̸=i
Qµ′
M,i(x′, a′
1, . . . , a′
N),
where µ′
i denotes the target policy of agent i with delayed
parameters θ′
i, and Qµ′
M,i denotes the target Q network for
agent i. Combining Eq. 9 and Eq. 10 yields our proposed
minimax learning framework.
Multi-Agent Adversarial Learning
The critical challenge in our proposed minimax learning
framework is how to handle the embedded minimization in
Eq. 9 and Eq. 10. Due to the continuous action space as well
as the non-linearity of Q function, directly optimizing the
minimization problem is computationally intractable. A naive
approximate solution can be performing an inner-loop gradi-
ent descent whenever performing an update step of Eq. 9 or
Eq. 10, but this is too computationally expensive for practical
use. Here we introduce an efﬁcient and end-to-end solution,
multi-agent adversarial learning (MAAL). The main ideas
of MAAL can be summarized in two steps: (1) approximate
the non-linear Q function by a locally linear function; (2)
replace the inner-loop minimization with a 1-step gradient
descent. Note the core idea of MAAL, locally linearizing the
Q function, is adapted from the recent adversarial training
technique originally developed for supervised learning. We
will discuss the connection between adversarial training and
MAAL in the end of this section.
For conciseness, we ﬁrst consider Eq. 10 and rewrite it
into the following form with auxiliary variables ϵ:
y = ri + γ Qµ′
M,i(x′, a′⋆
1, . . . , a′
i, . . . , a′⋆
N)
(11)
a′
k = µ′
k(ok), ∀1 ≤k ≤N
a′⋆
j = a′
j + ϵj, ∀j ̸= i
ϵj̸=i = arg min
ϵj̸=i Qµ′
M,i(x′, a′
1 + ϵ1, . . . , a′
i, . . . , a′
N + ϵN).
Eq. 11 can be interpreted as we are now seeking for
a set of perturbations ϵ such that the perturbed actions
a′⋆decrease Q value the most. By linearizing the Q func-
tion at Qµ
M,i(x, a′
1, . . . , a′
N), the desired perturbation ϵj
can be locally approximated by the gradient direction at
Qµ
M,i(x, a′
1, . . . , a′
N) w.r.t. a′
j. Then we use this local to de-
rive an approximation ˆϵj to the worst case perturbation by
taking a small gradient step:
∀j ̸= i, ˆϵj = −α∇ajQµ′
M,i(x′, a′
1, . . . , aj, . . . , a′
N),
(12)
where α is a tunable coefﬁcient representing the perturbation
rate. It can be also interpreted as the step size of the gradient
descent step: when α is too small, the local approximation er-
ror will be small but due to the small perturbation, the learned
policy can be far from the optimal solution of the minimax
objective we proposed; when α is too large, the approxima-
tion error may incur too much trouble for the overall learning
process and the agents may fail to learn good policies.
We can apply this technique to Eq. 9 as well and eventually
derive the following formulation:
∇θiJ(θi) =
Ex,a∼D


∇θiµi(oi)∇aiQµ
M,i(x, a⋆
1, . . . , ai, . . . a⋆
N)

ai = µi(oi)
a⋆
j = aj + ˆϵj, ∀j ̸= i
ˆϵj = −αj∇aj Qµ
M,i(x, a1, . . . , aN)


,
(13)
and
L(θi) = Ex,a,r,x′[(Qµ
M,i(x, a1, . . . , aN) −y)2],
(14)
y = ri + γ Qµ′
M,i(x′, a′⋆
1, . . . , a′
i, . . . , a′⋆
N)
a′
k = µ′
k(ok), ∀1 ≤k ≤N
a′⋆
j = a′
j + ˆϵ′
j, ∀j ̸= i
ˆϵ′
j = −αj∇a′
jQµ′
M,i(x, a′
1, . . . , a′
N),
where α1, . . . , αN are additional parameters. MAAL only
requires one additional gradient computation, and can be
executed in a fully end-to-end fashion. Finally, combining
Eq. 13 and Eq. 14 completes MAAL. The overall algorithm,
M3DDPG, is summarized as Algo. 1.
4216

Algorithm 1: Minimax Multi-Agent Deep Deterministic Policy Gradient (M3DDPG) for N agents
for episode = 1 to M do
Initialize a random process N for action exploration, and receive initial state information x
for t = 1 to max-episode-length do
for each agent i, select action ai = µθi(oi) + Nt w.r.t. the current policy and exploration
Execute actions a = (a1, . . . , aN) and observe reward r and new state information x′
Store (x, a, r, x′) in replay buffer D, and set x ←x′
for agent i = 1 to N do
Sample a random minibatch of S samples (xk, ak, rk, x′k) from D
Set yk = rk
i + γ Qµ′
M,i(x′k, a′
1, . . . , a′
N)|a′
i=µ′
i(ok
i ),a′
j̸=i=µ′
j(ok
j )+ˆϵ′
j with ˆϵ′
j deﬁned in Eq. 14
Update critic by minimizing the loss L(θi) = 1
S
P
k

yk −Qµ
M,i(xk, ak
1, . . . , ak
N)
2
Update actor using the sampled policy gradient with ˆϵj deﬁned in Eq. 13:
∇θiJ ≈1
S
X
k
∇θiµi(ok
i )∇aiQµ
M,i(xk, a⋆
1, . . . , ai, . . . , a⋆
N)

ai=µi(ok
i ),a⋆
j̸=i=ak
j +ˆϵj
end for
Update target network parameters for each agent i: θ′
i ←τθi + (1 −τ)θ′
i
end for
end for
Discussion
Connection to Adversarial Training
Adversarial train-
ing is a robust training approach for deep neural networks on
supervised learning (Goodfellow et al. 2014). The core idea
is to force the classiﬁer to predict correctly even when given
adversarial examples, which are obtained by adding a small
adversarial perturbation to the original input data such that the
classiﬁcation loss can be decreased the most. Formally, sup-
pose the classiﬁcation loss function is L(θ) = Ex,y [fθ(x; y)]
with input data x and label y. Adversarial training aims to
optimize the following adversarial loss instead
Ladv(θ)
=
Ex,y [fθ(x + ϵ⋆; y)]
(15)
ϵ⋆
=
arg max
∥ϵ∥≤α fθ(x + ϵ; y).
The core technique to efﬁciently optimize Ladv(θ) is to locally
linearize the loss function at fθ(x; y) and approximate ϵ⋆by
the scaled gradient.
Thanks to the centralized Q function, which takes the ac-
tions from all the agents as part of the input, we are able to
easily inject the minimax optimization (Eq. 11) and represent
it in a similar way to adversarial training (Eq. 15) so that
we can adopt the similar technique to effectively solve our
minimax optimization in a fully end-to-end fashion.
Connection to Single Agent Robust RL
M3DDPG with
MAAL can be also viewed as the special case of robust
reinforcement learning (RRL) (Morimoto and Doya 2005)
in the single agent setting, which aims to bridge the gap
between training in simulation and testing in the real world
by adding adversarial perturbations to the transition dynamics
during training. Here, we consider the multi-agent setting and
add worst case perturbations to actions of opponent agents
during training. Note that in the perspective of a single agent,
perturbations on opponents’ actions can be also considered
as a special adversarial noise on the dynamics.
Choice of α
In the extreme case of α = 0, M3DDPG de-
generates to the original MADDPG algorithm while as α
increases, the policy learning tends to be more robust but
the optimization becomes harder. In practice, using a ﬁxed
α throughout training can lead to very unstable learning
behavior due to the changing scale of the gradients. The
original adversarial training paper (Goodfellow, Shlens, and
Szegedy 2014) suggests to compute ϵ with a ﬁxed norm,
namely g = ∇xfθ(x; y), ˆϵ = α g
∥g∥, where x denotes the in-
put data to the classiﬁer and y denotes the label. In M3DDPG,
we can adaptively compute the perturbation ˆϵj by
g = ∇ajQµ
M,i(x, a1, . . . , aN),
ˆϵj = −αj
g
∥g∥.
(16)
Eq. 16 generally works ﬁne in practice but in some hard
multi-agent learning environments, unstable training behav-
ior can be still observed. We suspect that it is because the
changing norm of actions in these situations. Different from
the supervised learning setting where the norm of the input
data x is typically stable, in reinforcement learning the norm
of actions can drastically change even in a single episode.
Therefore, it is possible to see cases that even a perturbation
with a small ﬁxed norm overwhelms the action aj, which
may potentially lead to computational stability issue. There-
fore, we also introduce the following alternative for adaptive
perturbation computation:
g = ∇ajQµ
M,i(x, a1, . . . , aN),
ˆϵj = −αj∥aj∥g
∥g∥. (17)
Lastly, note that in a mixed cooperative and competitive
environment, ideally we only need to add adversarial pertur-
bations to competitors. But empirically we observe that also
4217

agent 1
agent 2
adversary
?
predator 1
prey
predator 2
predator 3
Figure 1: Illustrations of some environments we consider, in-
cluding Physical Deception (left) and Predator-Prey (right).
adding (smaller) perturbations to collaborators can further
improve the quality of learned policies.
5. Experiments
We adopt the same particle-world environments as the MAD-
DPG paper (Lowe et al. 2017) as well as the training con-
ﬁgurations. α is selected from a grid search over 0.1, 0.01
and 0.001. For testing, we generate a ﬁxed set of 2500 envi-
ronment conﬁgurations (i.e., landmarks and birthplaces) and
evaluate on this ﬁxed set for a fair comparison.
Environments
The particle world environment consists of N cooperative
agents, M adversarial agents and L landmarks in a two-
dimensional world with continuous space. We focus on the
four mixed cooperative and competitive scenarios to best
examine the effectiveness of our minimax formulation.
Covert communication
This is an adversarial communi-
cation environment, where a speaker agent (‘Alice’) must
communicate a message to a listener agent (‘Bob’) (N = 2),
who must reconstruct the message at the other end. However,
an adversarial agent (‘Eve’) (M = 1) is also observing the
channel, and wants to reconstruct the message — Alice and
Bob are penalized based on Eve’s reconstruction, and thus
Alice must encode her message using a randomly generated
key, known only to Alice and Bob.
Keep-away
This scenario consists of L = 1 target land-
mark, N = 2 cooperative agents and M = 1 adversarial
agent. Cooperating agents need to reach the landmark and
keep the adversarial agent away from the landmark by push-
ing it while the adversarial agent must stay at the landmark
to occupy it.
Physical deception
Here, N = 2 agents cooperate to reach
a single target landmark from a total of L = 2 landmarks.
They are rewarded based on the minimum distance of any
agent to the target (so only one agent needs to reach the target
landmark). However, a lone adversary (M = 1) also desires
to reach the target landmark; the catch is that the adversary
does not know which of the landmarks is the correct one.
Thus the cooperating agents, who are penalized based on the
adversary distance to the target, learn to spread out and cover
all landmarks so as to deceive the adversary.
0
0.3
0.6
0.9
MA vs MA
MA vs Minimax
Minimax vs MA
Minimax vs Minimax
Normalized Agent Score
Comparison between MADDPG (MA) and M3DDPG (Minimax)
Covert communication
Keep-away
Physical deception
Predator-prey
Figure 2: Comparison between M3DDPG (Minimax) and
classical MADDPG (MA) on the four mixed competitive
environments. Each bar cluster shows the 0-1 normalized
score for a set of competing policies in different roles (agent
vs adversary), where a higher score is better for the agent. In
all cases, M3DDPG outperforms MADDPG when directly
pitted against it.
Predator-prey
In this variant of the classic predator-prey
game, N = 3 slower cooperating agents must chase the faster
adversary (M = 1) around a randomly generated environ-
ment with L = 2 large landmarks impeding the way. Each
time the cooperative agents collide with an adversary, the
agents are rewarded while the adversary is penalized.
Comparison to MADDPG
To evaluate the quality of learned policies trained by dif-
ferent algorithms in competitive scenarios, we measure the
performance of agents trained by our M3DDPG and agents
by classical MADDPG in the roles of both normal agent and
adversary in each environment.
The results are in Figure 2, where we measure the rewards
of the normal agents in different scenarios and normalize
them to 0-1. We notice that in all the environments, the high-
est score is achieved when the M3DDPG agents play as the
normal agents against the MADDPG adversary (Minimax vs
MA); while the lowest score is when the MADDPG agents
act as normal agents against the M3DDPG adversary (MA vs
Minimax). This indicates that policies trained by M3DDPG
have much higher quality than original MADDPG.
Evaluation with Disruptive Adversaries
Instead of M3DDPG and MADDPG directly competing
against each other, now we consider their performances in the
worst possible situations through their individual competi-
tions against disruptive adversaries. We construct disruptive
adversaries by (1) ﬁxing the trained normal agents (M3DDPG
or MADDPG); (2) setting the reward of the disruptive adver-
sary as the negative value of normal agents’ reward (so that
the problem becomes zero-sum); and then (3) using DDPG
to train the disruptive adversary from scratch under the zero-
sum reward setting.
In the particle world environment, the competitive scenar-
ios are generally not zero-sum, which implies that according
to the default reward function, the adversaries may have dif-
ferent purposes rather than directly disrupting the normal
4218

Figure 3: Performances of M3DDPG (Minimax, red) and MADDPG (MA, blue) under the worst situation, i.e., against the
disruptive adversaries, on convert communication, keep-away, physical deception and predator-pray from left to right. The y-axis
denotes the reward of normal agents (ﬁxed) and x-axis denotes the training episodes performed of the disruptive adversaries.
Higher reward implies a more robust policy. Agents trained by M3DDPG (Minimax) perform better on all the scenarios.
agents. So, in order to evaluate the effectiveness our minimax
optimization in the worst situation, we convert every prob-
lems into a zero-sum form and compare the performances of
our M3DDPG agents as well as the MADDPG agents against
this artiﬁcially constructed adversaries. Moreover, since each
of our four environments has only 1 adversary, after ﬁxing
the normal agents, the learning problem degenerates to the
single agent setting and classical DDPG is sufﬁcient to stably
train a disruptive adversary.
The results are shown in Figure 3, where we plot the re-
ward of the ﬁxed normal agents of different algorithms as
the training of the disruptive adversaries progresses until con-
vergence. Note that due to the different environment designs,
the difﬁculty for the disruptive agents to break the strategy of
normal agents varies: for example, in convert communication,
since the private key is not accessible to the adversary agent,
breaking the encrypted communication will be very hard;
while in physical deception, since we do not allow communi-
cation and ﬁx the normal agents, a smart enough adversary
may easily infer the target landmark by observing the initial
behavior of the two cooperative agents. Nevertheless, despite
these intrinsic properties, the M3DDPG agents (Minimax)
achieves higher reward in all the scenarios, which implies
better robustness even in the worst situation.
6. Conclusion
In this paper, we propose a novel algorithm, minimax mulit-
agent deep deterministic policy gradient (M3DDPG), for
robust multi-agent reinforcement learning, which leverages
the minimax concept and introduces a minimax learning ob-
jective. To efﬁciently optimize the minimax objective, we pro-
pose MAAL, which approximates the inner-loop minimiza-
tion by a single gradient descent step. Empirically, M3DDPG
outperforms the benchmark methods on four mixed coopera-
tive and competitive scenarios.
Nevertheless, due to the single step gradient approximation
in MAAL, which is efﬁcient in computation, an M3DDPG
agent can only explore locally worst situation during the
evolving process at training, which can still lead to unsatisfy-
ing behavior when testing opponents have drastically differ-
ent strategies. It will be an interesting direction to re-examine
the robustness-efﬁciency trade-off in MAAL and further im-
prove policy learning by placing more computations on the
minimax optimization. We leave this as our future work.
References
Busoniu, L.; Babuska, R.; and De Schutter, B. 2008. A
comprehensive survey of multiagent reinforcement learning.
IEEE Transactions on Systems Man and Cybernetics Part C
Applications and Reviews 38(2):156.
Finn, C.; Abbeel, P.; and Levine, S. 2017. Model-agnostic
meta-learning for fast adaptation of deep networks. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1703.03400.
Foerster, J. N.; Assael, Y. M.; de Freitas, N.; and Whiteson,
S. 2016a. Learning to communicate with deep multi-agent
reinforcement learning. CoRR abs/1605.06676.
Foerster, J. N.; Assael1, Y. M.; de Freitas, N.; and Whiteson,
S. 2016b. Learning to Communicate to Solve Riddles with
Deep Distributed Recurrent Q-Networks.
Foerster, J.; Farquhar, G.; Afouras, T.; Nardelli, N.; and
Whiteson, S. 2017. Counterfactual multi-agent policy gradi-
ents. arXiv preprint arXiv:1705.08926.
Foerster, J.; Chen, R. Y.; Al-Shedivat, M.; Whiteson, S.;
Abbeel, P.; and Mordatch, I. 2018. Learning with opponent-
learning awareness. In Proceedings of the 17th International
Conference on Autonomous Agents and MultiAgent Systems,
122–130. International Foundation for Autonomous Agents
and Multiagent Systems.
Gao, C.; Mueller, M.; and Hayward, R. 2018. Adversarial
policy gradient for alternating markov games.
Goodfellow, I.; Pouget-Abadie, J.; Mirza, M.; Xu, B.; Warde-
Farley, D.; Ozair, S.; Courville, A.; and Bengio, Y. 2014.
Generative adversarial nets. In Advances in neural informa-
tion processing systems, 2672–2680.
Goodfellow, I. J.; Shlens, J.; and Szegedy, C. 2014. Ex-
plaining and harnessing adversarial examples. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1412.6572.
Grau-Moya, J.; Leibfried, F.; and Bou-Ammar, H. 2018.
Balancing two-player stochastic games with soft q-learning.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1802.03216.
Haarnoja, T.; Tang, H.; Abbeel, P.; and Levine, S. 2017. Re-
inforcement learning with deep energy-based policies. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1702.08165.
He, H.; Boyd-Graber, J.; Kwok, K.; and Daum´e III, H. 2016.
Opponent modeling in deep reinforcement learning. In Inter-
national Conference on Machine Learning, 1804–1813.
4219

Hu, J.; Wellman, M. P.; et al. 1998. Multiagent reinforcement
learning: theoretical framework and an algorithm. In ICML,
volume 98, 242–250. Citeseer.
Lanctot, M.; Zambaldi, V.; Gruslys, A.; Lazaridou, A.; Pero-
lat, J.; Silver, D.; Graepel, T.; et al. 2017. A uniﬁed game-
theoretic approach to multiagent reinforcement learning. In
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 4190–
4203.
Lazaridou, A.; Peysakhovich, A.; and Baroni, M. 2016. Multi-
agent cooperation and the emergence of (natural) language.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1612.07182.
Leibo, J. Z.; Zambaldi, V. F.; Lanctot, M.; Marecki, J.; and
Graepel, T. 2017. Multi-agent reinforcement learning in
sequential social dilemmas. CoRR abs/1702.03037.
Levine, S.; Finn, C.; Darrell, T.; and Abbeel, P. 2016. End-
to-end training of deep visuomotor policies. The Journal of
Machine Learning Research 17(1):1334–1373.
Lillicrap, T. P.; Hunt, J. J.; Pritzel, A.; Heess, N.; Erez, T.;
Tassa, Y.; Silver, D.; and Wierstra, D. 2015. Continuous
control with deep reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1509.02971.
Littman, M. L. 1994. Markov games as a framework for
multi-agent reinforcement learning. In Proceedings of the
eleventh international conference on machine learning, vol-
ume 157, 157–163.
Lowe, R.; Wu, Y.; Tamar, A.; Harb, J.; Abbeel, O. P.; and Mor-
datch, I. 2017. Multi-agent actor-critic for mixed cooperative-
competitive environments. In Advances in Neural Informa-
tion Processing Systems, 6379–6390.
Mandlekar, A.; Zhu, Y.; Garg, A.; Fei-Fei, L.; and Savarese,
S. 2017. Adversarially robust policy learning: Active con-
struction of physically-plausible perturbations. In Intelligent
Robots and Systems (IROS), 2017 IEEE/RSJ International
Conference on, 3932–3939. IEEE.
Mnih, V.; Kavukcuoglu, K.; Silver, D.; Rusu, A. A.; Veness,
J.; Bellemare, M. G.; Graves, A.; Riedmiller, M.; Fidjeland,
A. K.; Ostrovski, G.; et al.
2015.
Human-level control
through deep reinforcement learning. Nature 518(7540):529–
533.
Mordatch, I., and Abbeel, P. 2017. Emergence of grounded
compositional language in multi-agent populations. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1703.04908.
Morimoto, J., and Doya, K. 2005. Robust reinforcement
learning. Neural computation 17(2):335–359.
OpenAI. 2018. OpenAI Five. https://blog.openai.com/openai-
ﬁve/. Accessed: 2018-09-03.
Osborne, M. J., et al. 2004. An introduction to game theory,
volume 3. Oxford university press New York.
Peng, P.; Yuan, Q.; Wen, Y.; Yang, Y.; Tang, Z.; Long, H.;
and Wang, J. 2017a. Multiagent bidirectionally-coordinated
nets for learning to play starcraft combat games.
CoRR
abs/1703.10069.
Peng, X. B.; Andrychowicz, M.; Zaremba, W.; and Abbeel, P.
2017b. Sim-to-real transfer of robotic control with dynamics
randomization. arXiv preprint arXiv:1710.06537.
P´erolat, J.; Strub, F.; Piot, B.; and Pietquin, O. 2016. Learning
nash equilibrium for general-sum markov games from batch
data. arXiv preprint arXiv:1606.08718.
Pinto, L.; Davidson, J.; Sukthankar, R.; and Gupta, A. 2017.
Robust adversarial reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1703.02702.
Silver, D.; Lever, G.; Heess, N.; Degris, T.; Wierstra, D.; and
Riedmiller, M. 2014. Deterministic policy gradient algo-
rithms. In Proceedings of the 31st International Conference
on Machine Learning, 387–395.
Silver, D.; Huang, A.; Maddison, C. J.; Guez, A.; Sifre, L.;
Van Den Driessche, G.; Schrittwieser, J.; Antonoglou, I.;
Panneershelvam, V.; Lanctot, M.; et al. 2016. Mastering
the game of go with deep neural networks and tree search.
Nature 529(7587):484–489.
Sukhbaatar, S.; Fergus, R.; et al. 2016. Learning multiagent
communication with backpropagation. In Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems, 2244–2252.
Sutton, R. S., and Barto, A. G. 1998. Reinforcement learning:
An introduction, volume 1. MIT press Cambridge.
Sutton, R. S.; McAllester, D. A.; Singh, S. P.; and Mansour,
Y. 2000. Policy gradient methods for reinforcement learn-
ing with function approximation. In Advances in neural
information processing systems, 1057–1063.
Tesauro, G. 2004. Extending q-learning to general adaptive
multi-agent systems. In Advances in neural information
processing systems, 871–878.
Tobin, J.; Fong, R.; Ray, A.; Schneider, J.; Zaremba, W.;
and Abbeel, P. 2017. Domain randomization for transfer-
ring deep neural networks from simulation to the real world.
In Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS), 2017 IEEE/RSJ
International Conference on, 23–30. IEEE.
Uther, W. T., and Veloso, M. M. 1997. Generalizing adversar-
ial reinforcement learning. In Proceedings of the AAAI Fall
Symposium on Model Directed Autonomous Systems, 206.
Citeseer.
Wei, E.; Wicke, D.; Freelan, D.; and Luke, S. 2018. Multia-
gent soft q-learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1804.09817.
Williams, R. J. 1992. Simple statistical gradient-following
algorithms for connectionist reinforcement learning. Machine
learning 8(3-4):229–256.
Wu, C.; Kreidieh, A.; Parvate, K.; Vinitsky, E.; and Bayen,
A. M.
2017.
Flow: Architecture and benchmarking for
reinforcement learning in trafﬁc control.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:1710.05465.
Yang, Y.; Luo, R.; Li, M.; Zhou, M.; Zhang, W.; and Wang, J.
2018. Mean ﬁeld multi-agent reinforcement learning. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1802.05438.
4220
