IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SYSTEMS, MAN, AND CYBERNETICS: SYSTEMS, VOL. 54, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2024
7633
Adversarial Attacks on Multiagent Deep
Reinforcement Learning Models in Continuous
Action Space
Ziyuan Zhou
, Graduate Student Member, IEEE, Guanjun Liu
, Senior Member, IEEE,
Weiran Guo
, Graduate Student Member, IEEE, and MengChu Zhou
, Fellow, IEEE
Abstract—Multiagent deep reinforcement learning (MADRL)
has been recently applied in many ﬁelds, including industry 5.0,
but it is sensitive to adversarial attacks. Although adversarial
attacks can be detrimental, they are crucial for testing and
assisting in enhancing the robustness of models. Existing attacks
on MADRL-based models are not sufﬁcient since these attacks
involve ﬁxed perturbed agents, without taking into account cases
where perturbed agents change. In this article, we present a
novel adversarial attack framework. In this framework, we
deﬁne critical agents that change over time, i.e., when they are
perturbed a little, the whole multiagent system is perturbed
greatly. Then, we identify critical agents through their worst-
case joint actions. In this identifying process, we use gradient
information, differential evolution, and SARSA to deal with the
challenge caused by changes in the perturbed agents and to
compute the worst-case joint actions. After identifying them,
we use the target attack method to perturb them. We apply
our method to attack the models trained by two state-of-the-
art MADRL algorithms under three environments, including
two industry-related ones. The experimental results demonstrate
our method has a stronger perturbing ability than the existing
methods.
Index
Terms—Adversarial
attacks,
continuous
action
space, industry 5.0, multiagent deep reinforcement learning
(MADRL).
I. INTRODUCTION
I
NDUSTRY 5.0 involves the interaction between humans
and machines [1], [2], [3], [4], [5], [6], where multiagent
Manuscript received 6 June 2024; accepted 27 August 2024. Date of
publication 19 September 2024; date of current version 20 November 2024.
This work was supported in part by the National Nature Science Foundation
of China under Grant 62172299 and Grant 62032019; in part by the
Shanghai Science and Technology Committee under Grant 22511105500;
in part by the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities
under Grant 2023-4-YB-05; in part by the Space Optoelectronic Measurement
and Perception Lab., Beijing Institute of Control Engineering under Grant
LabSOMP-2023-03; and in part by the International Exchange Program for
Graduate Students, Tongji University under Grant 2023020041. This article
was recommended by Associate Editor Y. Lin. (Corresponding authors:
Guanjun Liu; MengChu Zhou.)
Ziyuan
Zhou,
Guanjun
Liu,
and
Weiran
Guo
are
with
the
Department of Computer Science, Tongji University, Shanghai 201804,
China
(e-mail:
ziyuanzhou@tongji.edu.cn;
liuguanjun@tongji.edu.cn;
gwr00519@tongji.edu.cn).
MengChu Zhou is with the Macao Institute of Systems Engineering
and Collaborative Laboratory for Intelligent Science and Systems, Macau
University of Science and Technology, Macau, China, and also with the
Discrete Event Systems Laboratory and the Helen and John C. Hartmann
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, New Jersey Institute of
Technology, Newark, NJ 07102 USA (e-mail: mengchu@gmail.com).
Color versions of one or more ﬁgures in this article are available at
https://doi.org/10.1109/TSMC.2024.3454118.
Digital Object Identiﬁer 10.1109/TSMC.2024.3454118
deep reinforcement learning (MADRL) has found extensive
applications, including automatic vehicles [7], [8], [9], [10],
robotics [11], [12], [13], [14] and intelligent education [15].
MADRL faces the challenges of nonstationary and partial
observability. A centralized training and decentralized execu-
tion (CTDE) framework [16], [17], [18], [19] can effectively
address these challenges by leveraging the advantages of cen-
tralized training during a training phase, allowing individual
agents to make decisions based on their local observations
and individual information during an execution phase. Classic
algorithms of CTDE-based MADRL in continuous action
space include multiagent deep deterministic policy gradient
(MADDPG) [18] and factored multiagent centralized policy
gradient (FACMAC) [11].
However, recent studies have shown that the models trained
using MADRL are sensitive to the perturbation in agent
states [20], [21], [22], [23], [24]. These perturbations, stem-
ming from sensor errors or deliberate malicious attacks, can
result in severe consequences. Importantly, perturbations in the
states of certain agents have the potential not only to misguide
individual decisions but also to disrupt the cooperative policies
in a team. Attacks on MADRL-trained models are harmful,
but they are crucial to validate the reliability of industrial
applications in the face of unforeseen perturbations. Therefore,
it is necessary to design adversarial attacks for generating
perturbation observations that may signiﬁcantly impact team
collaboration. Intuitively, heightened levels of stealth and dis-
ruption in an attack correspond to more conducive to assisting
in improving the robustness of the model. As a result, we aim
to design an attack framework that has signiﬁcant damage to
the model while perturbing agents as few as possible.
There are some related studies for adversarial attacks
on single-agent deep reinforcement learning (SADRL) mod-
els [25], [26], [27], [28], [29], [30], [31], which do not
consider which agents should be selected as victims. In the
context of adversarial attacks on MADRL models, it has been
demonstrated that the adversary can be effectively modeled
as a stochastic game (SG). The existence of the optimal
adversary is established in [23]. However, they assume that
the victim agent set is ﬁxed. It cannot be modeled as SG when
such a set changes. Guo et al. [20], [22], [24] only focus on
the case of ﬁxed victims. As a primary focus of our work,
the initial challenge we aim to address is the selection of
critical agents designated as victims. The secondary challenge
involves formulating guidance on the worst-case joint actions
where the victim set remains uncertain. The efﬁcacy of an
2168-2216 c⃝2024 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Texas at Arlington. Downloaded on June 27,2026 at 06:35:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

7634
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SYSTEMS, MAN, AND CYBERNETICS: SYSTEMS, VOL. 54, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2024
attack is based on the evaluation of joint actions’ impact on
the value function of one state. However, the joint action-value
function or centralized critic network is unknown during the
decentralized process in CTDE. Moreover, it is trained based
on the assumption that all agents take their optimal actions.
During the attack process, it is necessary to evaluate the subop-
timal behaviors of agents, and the original estimation may not
be accurate for such suboptimal behaviors. Consequently, the
third challenge we confront is how to devise a methodology to
assess the inﬂuence of actions on the team policy throughout
a testing process.
Drawing from the aforementioned challenges, based on
our prior work [32], we introduce a novel framework for
adversarial attacks on the models trained by MADRL in
continuous action space (AMCA). The contributions of this
work intends to make are as follows.
1) AMCA is introduced and consists of two steps. The
ﬁrst step employs either gradient information (GI) or
differential evolution (DE) to identify critical agents.
It aims to determine the worst-case joint actions for
them, thus minimizing the cumulative reward of the
collaborative team. The second step executes a targeted
attack, generating perturbations based on a novel loss
function as the optimization objective.
2) A SARSA-based methodology for the learning of the
joint action-value function (SJAV) is introduced in the
framework of MADRL. The function represents the rela-
tionship between individual actions and the cumulative
rewards. It is employed as the objective function in the
ﬁrst step of AMCA. The convergence of SJAV is proved.
3) AMCA is applied to the models trained by MADRL
given two environments related to industry and a general
one. The experimental results demonstrate that AMCA
has a stronger perturbing ability compared to others.
The subsequent sections of this article are as follows.
Section II presents the related work of adversarial attacks
on SADRL and MADRL. We recall the basic concepts and
methods in Section III and introduce the AMCA framework
in Section IV. Then, we use AMCA to attack models trained
by MADRL to test their robustness in Section V. Section VI
summarizes this work and suggestions for future work.
II. RELATED WORK
A. Adversarial Attacks on SADRL Models
In the context of adversarial attacks on SADRL models, the
studies [25] and [26] utilize gradient-based adversary attacks
like deep neural network (DNN) to generate adversarial-state
perturbations. However, they only mislead an agent to do
a wrong action and may not lead to the minimal expected
reward. In [27], the adversary is modeled as a Markov decision
process (MDP), and DRL is employed to address it, which
can work well in low-dimension state space. To extend this
method to high-dimension one, the work [28] proposes a
two-step attack framework consisting of a director component
for advising the worst-case action and an actor component
for generating perturbations based on the guidance of the
director. These studies do not consider which agents should be
selected as victims which is important in adversarial attacks
on MADRL models.
B. Adversarial Attacks on MADRL Models
In the ﬁeld of adversarial attacks on MADRL models,
Lin et al. [22] used a two-step framework like [28] to generate
adversarial observations, where an agent is selected as a
victim during the training process. When the victim changes,
the model has to retrain. Studies [20], [23], [33] model the
adversarial attacks as an SG and use MADRL to solve it, but
they view all agents as victims. In this work, we propose an
adversarial attack framework to ﬁnd deﬁciencies in MADRL
models by generating perturbation with a high impact on the
team while interfering with the minimum number of agents.
Building upon our previous work [32], where we introduced
a framework known as robustness testing based on critical
agents (RTCAs) for MADRL in discrete action space, this
work extends the framework to the case of continuous one.
Some differences exist between RTCA and AMCA: 1) a novel
GI-based worst-case joint action selection method is proposed
in Section IV-A1, which is a feature absent in the original
RTCA framework; 2) convergence of the SARSA-based joint
action-value function and time complexity of AMCA are
analyzed in Sections IV-B and IV-C, respectively, which is
not given in our prior work; 3) an innovative loss function
for target attacks in the context of continuous action space is
presented and diverse methods to optimize it are presented in
Section IV-C, which differ from our prior work; and 4) the
experiment is conducted in environments in continuous action
space, including two industry-related and a general one, while
the discrete action space ones are explored in RTCA.
III. BASIC CONCEPTS AND METHODS
This section introduces decentralized partially observable
MDPes (Dec-POMDPs), two classical MADRL in continuous
action space, state-adversarial SGs (SASGs), and agent state
adversarial Dec-POMDPs (SADPs). The following provides
descriptions of important concepts.
1) The worst-case joint action is the incorrect action to
reduce the discounted cumulative reward of the team.
2) Adversarial perturbation is used to make agents take
worst-case joint actions.
3) The clean observation is created based on the current
state of the environment.
4) Adversarial observation refers to an observation that
is obtained by modifying a clean observation through
adversarial perturbation.
5) The goal of the adversary is to generate the adversarial
perturbation via adversarial attacks, which are used to
test the robustness of models.
6) The victim refers to the agent whose observation is
perturbed by the adversary.
7) Critical agents, at any given time step, are those whose
actions have the most signiﬁcant impact on the team.
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Texas at Arlington. Downloaded on June 27,2026 at 06:35:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

ZHOU et al.: ADVERSARIAL ATTACKS ON MADRL MODELS IN CONTINUOUS ACTION SPACE
7635
A. Dec-POMDPs
A Dec-POMDP is formally denoted as a tuple

S, {Ai}i∈N , {Oi}i∈N , N, Z, p, r, γ

where N represents the set of agents, with N ≜|N| denoting
the total number of agents. Each agent is identiﬁed as i ∈
N ≜1, . . . , N. The state set is denoted as S, with s ∈S
representing the environmental state. The action of agent i is
denoted by ai ∈Ai, where Ai corresponds to the action space
of agent i. The observation oi ∈Oi is determined based on
the observation function Z(s, a), deﬁned as Z(s, a):S × A1 ×
· · ·×AN →O1×· · ·×ON, capturing the observation of agent
i. The observation space of agent i is represented by Oi. The
immediate reward is denoted by r, with r1 = · · · = rN = r
applying uniformly to each agent. The reward function for all
agents is represented as R(s, a, s′):S×A1×· · ·×AN×S →R.
The transition probability, denoted as p : S×A1×· · ·×AN →
(S), characterizes the dynamics based on the joint action a.
The discount factor over time is represented by γ ∈[0, 1].
B. MADRL in Continuous Action Space
Solving Dec-POMDPs is proven to be NEXP-complete,
primarily attributed to the inherent combinatorial complexities
in their resolution [34]. Contextually, CTDE emerges as
a promising learning paradigm for tackling Dec-POMDPs.
Within CTDE, a centralized controller is used to assess the
team cooperation policy during the training phase, according to
the environmental state. During the execution phase, individual
agents act based on their respective observations.
A classical approach to address Dec-POMDPs leverages
Q-function factorization, exempliﬁed by methodologies in [16]
and [17]. This factorization adheres to the individualized goal
maximization (IGM) condition [35], i.e.,
arg max
a
Qjt(τ, a) =
⎛
⎜⎜⎝
arg max
a1 Q1
τ 1, a1
· · ·
arg max
aN QN
τ N, aN
⎞
⎟⎟⎠
(1)
where
τ
∈
T 1 × · · · × T N
represents
the
joint
action-observation histories and T i denotes the set of action-
observation histories for agent i. The joint action-value
function, denoted by Qjt:T 1×· · ·×T N ×A1×· · ·×AN →R,
is used for evaluating the team cooperation policy.
The methods in [16] and [17] aim to establish additivity and
monotonicity as follows, serving as two sufﬁcient conditions
for IGM in discrete action space:
Qjt(τ, a) =
N

i=1
Qi
τ i, ai
(2)
∂Qjt(τ, a)
∂Qi
τ i, ai ≥0, 0 ≤i < N.
(3)
In the case of continuous action space, MADDPG [18]
and FACMAC [11] are two classical methods based on
CTDE. The former extends deep deterministic policy gradient
(DDPG) [36] to the multiagent setting, while the latter focuses
on a centralized critic with a factored representation for more
effective agent coordination.
MADDPG [18] adopts a decentralized execution approach,
where each agent interacts with the environment based on
its own observations and policy. However, during training,
the learning process is centralized, meaning that the agents
share experiences and information to improve their policies
collaboratively. The policy gradient is as follows:
∇θiJ

μi
= ED

∇θiπi
τ i
∇πiQi(τ, a)|ai=πi(τ i)

(4)
where θi is the parameter of the actor of agent i, πi ∈
i : Oi →Ai is the policy of agent i, i is the policy space
of agent i, and D is the replay buffer. Each agent is equipped
with an individual critic responsible for evaluating the value
of its actions. Identifying critical agents and determining their
worst-case joint actions by utilizing a single critic may ﬁnd
critical agents speciﬁc to that agent rather than addressing the
entire team collaboratively.
FACMAC [11] is a pioneering method for incorporating
the IGM condition within a multiagent actor–critic framework.
FACMAC employs either VDN or QMIX as the centralized
critic. The policy gradient formulation is as follows:
∇θiJ

πi
= ED

∇θiπi
τ i
∇πiQπ
jt (τ, a)|ai=πi(τ i)

(5)
where π ∈1 × · · · × N :O1 × · · · × ON →A1 × · · · × AN
is the joint policy.
C. SASG
An SASG [23] is formally deﬁned as a tuple

S, {Ai}i∈N , {Bi}i∈M, {ri}i∈N , M, N, p, γ

where Bi represents the set of adversarial states speciﬁc to
agent i, M ⊆N is the set of victim agents, and M = |M|
denotes the number of victims.
Assuming that the adversarial perturbation vi(s) for agent
i is deterministic (vi : S →Bi), the value and action-value
functions of SASG are deﬁned as follows:
Vi
π◦v(s) = Eπ◦v,p
 ∞

k=0
γ kri
t+k+1|st = s

(6)
Qi
π◦v(s, a) = Eπ◦v,p
 ∞

k=0
γ kri
t+k+1|st = s, at = a

(7)
where v ≜(vi, . . . , vM) denotes the joint adversarial per-
turbation and π ◦v denotes the joint policy under the joint
adversarial perturbation.
The joint optimal adversarial perturbation aims to minimize
the expected cumulative discount reward for each victim agent.
Therefore, the value function and action-value one are
Vi
π◦v∗(s) = min
vi Vi
π◦

vi,v−i
∗
(s)
(8)
Qi
π◦v∗(s, a) = min
vi Qi
π◦

vi,v−i
∗
(s, a)
(9)
where v∗≜(v1
∗, . . . , vM
∗) represents the joint optimal adver-
sarial perturbation, vi denotes an arbitrary valid adversarial
perturbation, and v−i
∗≜(v1
∗, . . . , vi−1
∗
, vi+1
∗
, . . . , vM
∗).
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Texas at Arlington. Downloaded on June 27,2026 at 06:35:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

7636
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SYSTEMS, MAN, AND CYBERNETICS: SYSTEMS, VOL. 54, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2024
The properties of SASG, such as the existence and con-
traction of the joint optimal adversarial perturbation, are
discussed in [23]. It is highlighted that the problem of solving
the joint optimal adversarial perturbation can be modeled
as an SG well-addressed by MADRL. Consequently, stud-
ies [22], [33], [37] have solved this problem via MADRL.
However, during the training process, victim agents are
assumed to be ﬁxed. If the set of victims changes, retraining
is required for MADRL models. Addressing this limitation is
the focus of our work.
D. SADP
An SADP is formally deﬁned as a tuple

S, {Ai}i∈N , {Oi}i∈N , {Bi}i∈M, N, M, Z, r, p, γ

.
Similar to SASG setting, the value function and action-value
function of the adversary are expressed as follows:
Vi
πi◦vi∗

τ i
= min
vi Vi
πi◦vi

τ i
(10)
Qi
πi◦vi∗

τ i, ai
= min
vi Qi
πi◦vi

τ i, ai
.
(11)
It is evident that we can leverage CTDE-based MADRL to
solve the optimal joint policy. However, it is crucial to note
that the victim agents are known with certainty, including the
number of victims M and their respective indexes. As the value
of M changes, the SADP undergoes variations, necessitating
the retraining of the adversary agent through CTDE-based
MADRL. In this study, we introduce a novel adversarial
attack framework to solve SADP, denoted as AMCA. This
framework has the capability to select critical agents from
the set N as the victim set M, offering insights into the
worst-case joint actions of the victims. Subsequently, AMCA
facilitates the generation of adversarial observations targeted
at the identiﬁed victim agents. Notably, our AMCA framework
operates without needing any pretraining, enabling it to adapt
a variable set of victims M.
IV. ADVERSARIAL ATTACKS ON MADRL-BASED
MODELS IN CONTINUOUS ACTION SPACE
A. Selection of Critical Agents and Worst-Case Joint Actions
The joint action-value function Qjt is nondifferentiable for
discrete action space, which is unsuitable for continuous ones.
Therefore, we propose a novel approach for critical agent
selection and the worst-case joint action determination based
on the GI of Qjt.
1) GI-Based Method: In this section, we consider the
scenario where the adversary has the capability to get the
information of Qjt. The centralized critic of MADDPG is for
one agent instead of the team, so this method is unsuitable for
MADDPG in this assumption.
The adversary seeks to destroy the team cooperation policy
with the aim of minimizing the accumulated expected reward
of the team, i.e., Qjt in FACMAC. The adversary aims to
minimize the following function:
vg(τ) = arg
min
M,{ai
i∈M}
Qjt

τ, aM, a−M
(12)
Algorithm 1: GI-Based Algorithm
Input: Objective function Qjt, the joint
action-observation histories τ, the joint policy of
agents π, the value Qjt(τ, a), the step of PGD U1
Output: The victim set M and the joint action aM
1 for u = 1, 2, . . . , U1 do
2
Generate the worst-case joint actions ˆa based on
Eq. (13);
3 Initialize: M ←∅, Qmin ←Qjt(τ, a) and all
combinations indices
ci ←list(itertools.combinations(range(0, N), M)
4 for i ∈ci do
5
Select element aM from ˆa according to index i;
6
Compute the joint action-value function
Qjt ←

τ, aM, a−M
;
7
if Qjt < Qmin then
8
Qmin ←Qjt;
9
aM ←aci;
10 return

aM, a−M
where aM is the victim agent’s joint action and a−M is
the normal ones. As shown in the context of classiﬁcation
tasks [38], [39], [40], [41], they generate the perturbation
based on the gradient of DNN. We use the GI to generate the
worst-case joint actions of all agents by adding the actions’
perturbations. We employ PGD [41], which utilizes the U1-
step iterative process of gradient descent as follows:
ˆau+1 = clip

ˆau −αsgn∇ˆauQjt

τ, ˆau

|ˆa0=a
(13)
where the clip is to constrain the range of perturbation,
ensuring that the action after adding perturbation still falls
within the valid range.
When we get the worst-case joint action ˆa, we select
the critical agent via the combinatorial optimization problem
of selecting M elements from a set of agents N with the
objective (12). The whole process is shown in Algorithm 1
2) DE-Based Method: We propose a methodology leverag-
ing DE to discern critical agents and determine the worst-case
joint actions within MADRL. This approach aims to point
out the victim agents and their corresponding actions that
signiﬁcantly inﬂuence the overall team performance.
The objective of the adversary is the same as the GI-based
method, i.e., (12). The DE algorithm, a global optimization
technique [42], [43], [44], employs a population-based evo-
lutionary concept to explore optimal solutions on a global
scale, making it a widely utilized method for tackling complex
combinatorial optimization challenges. A group of candidate
solutions is retained in DE, and each is represented as a
vector within a multidimensional search space. The algorithm
generates new candidate solutions in each iteration by per-
turbing the existing vectors and integrating them through a
basic arithmetic operator. Subsequently, an objective function
is employed to assess the ﬁtness of these candidates, and the
individuals with superior performance are chosen to make up
the succeeding generation of the population.
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Texas at Arlington. Downloaded on June 27,2026 at 06:35:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

ZHOU et al.: ADVERSARIAL ATTACKS ON MADRL MODELS IN CONTINUOUS ACTION SPACE
7637
Algorithm 2: DE-Based Algorithm
Input: Objective function Qjt, scaling factor F = 0.5,
population size of 400, a maximum of T
iterations, crossover rate CR, histories τ, joint
policy of agents π, value Qjt(τ, a).
Output: Optimal solution Dbest ∈D ≜{M, {ˆai}i∈M}
1 Generate a population D comprising |D| randomly
initialized solutions and assess their ﬁtness based on Qjt;
2 for t = 1, 2, . . . , T1 do
3
for each solution xj ∈D do
4
Sample three distinct solutions, denoted as Dd1,
Dd2, and Dd3, randomly chosen from the
population D;
5
Create the mutant vector Dj based on (14);
6
Produce the trial vector yj by executing binary
crossover between xj and Dj with a crossover rate
of CR;
7
Produce the joint action of victim agent aM
y
and
aM
D
using yj and Dj;
8
Assess ﬁtness of yj;
9
if Qjt(τ, aM
y , a−M) < Qjt(τ, aM
D , a−M) then
10
Update the population D by replacing Dj with
yj;
11 Choose and return the best solution, Dbest, identiﬁed
from the population D;
In this study, we represent the index of critical agent i and
its corresponding worst-case joint action aii∈M as a candidate
solution. The joint action of victim agents aM is included
in each candidate solution, and a tuple of 2M elements that
include candidate solutions is formed. aM is not predeﬁned
but obtained through DE. It dynamically changes. Therefore,
it can meet the requirements of real-time attacks. Following
the same conﬁguration as in [45], we initiate the algorithm
by generating a population D comprising some candidate
solutions. An additional candidate solution is produced in each
iteration via DE
Dj(g + 1) = Dd1(g) + F

Dd2(g) −Dd3(g)

d1 ̸= d2 ̸= d3
(14)
where the element Dj within the candidate solution comprises
three randomly selected elements, employing a scaling param-
eter F set to 0.5 and g denotes the current generation index.
The indices of the randomly chosen elements are denoted as
d1, d2, and d3. The procedure is delineated in Algorithm 2,
Through this approach, we select the agents that are most
signiﬁcant in inﬂuencing the team’s overall performance and
point out the actions that are prone to inducing failure or
suboptimal results. The advantages of our methods are as
follows.
1) Both GI-based and DE-based methods are more ﬂexible
than those in [20] and [22], which assume the ﬁxed
victims. Once the victim set is changed, the latter must
retrain a DRL model. Note that, the number of victims
M can change at any time in our setting.
Algorithm 3: SJAV
1 Initialize ˜Qθ
jt and replay buffer R;
2 for t = 1, 2, . . . , T2 do
3
Acquire the state s and the observations of each
agent [o1, . . . , oN];
4
Apply the ϵ-greedy joint action a as per
[Q1(τ 1, a1), · · · , QN(τ N, aN)], leading to the next
state s′ and observations [o′1, . . . , o′N];
5
Add < s, a, r, s′ > to the set R;
6
if |R| ≥BS then
7
Randomly select BS transitions from the replay
buffer < sk, ak, rk, s′k >k=1,2,...,BS;
8
Optimize θ by minimizing (15);
2) Employing DE for computing the indices of critical
agents and their worst-case joint actions has another
merit: less information is required. Understanding the
inputs and outputs of the joint action-value function is
sufﬁcient. Its internal structure is not required.
B. SARSA-Based Joint Action-Value Function
In Section IV-A, we assume the adversary possesses
knowledge of the joint action-value function. However, like
MADDPG, the centralized critic is unsuitable for evaluating
the impact of individual actions on team cooperation. Qjt of
FACMAC in CTDE assumes that all agents make their optimal
actions. Thus, when the agents do not take the optimal actions,
it may cause the joint action-value function to inadequately
evaluate the team reward. Moreover, this component is not
deployed in the testing process based on CTDE, thus well
avoiding the computation of Qjt. To address this issue, we
incorporate the training of a joint action-value network based
on SARSA [46] into the execution process.
During the execution process, the joint policy π remains
ﬁxed. So, we employ an ϵ-greedy strategy to explore various
trajectories comprehensively, including not only good cases
but also suboptimal ones. We establish ˜Qjt (i.e., the joint
action-value function) as a neural network parameterized by
θ. Its inputs consist of the global state s and the joint action
a. The aim of learning ˜Qjt is to minimize the following loss
function:
Ljt(θ) =
BS

k=1

Rk + γ ˜Qjt

s′
k, a′
k

−˜Qjt(sk, ak)

(15)
where BS denotes the batch size. The procedure is outlined in
Algorithm 3.
Theorem 1: If the ϵ-greedy policy satisﬁes the conditions
of the greedy in the limit with inﬁnite exploration (GLIE),
then the convergence of ˜Qjt is ensured.
GLIE means that a learning algorithm gradually transitions
to a purely greedy policy as the number of exploration steps
approaches the inﬁnity. The proof of Theorem 1 is presented
in the Appendix.
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Texas at Arlington. Downloaded on June 27,2026 at 06:35:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

7638
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SYSTEMS, MAN, AND CYBERNETICS: SYSTEMS, VOL. 54, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2024
Algorithm 4: AMCA
1 Initialize the environment.
2 for t = 1, 2, . . . , T3 do
3
Obtain the current state s and the observations

o1, . . . , oN
;
4
Compute the victim index and worst-case action
using Algorithms 1, 2, and 3;
5
Generate the adversarial state as per (17) or (18).
6
Execute an action based on the normal and victim
agents’ observations;
Fig. 1.
Illustration of AMCA involves the following steps. First, the joint
action-value function is learned using SARSA based on clean observations
and actions sampled via the ϵ-greedy strategy. Next, critical agents and their
worst actions are identiﬁed using GI-based or DE-based methods. Finally,
perturbations are generated through targeted attack methods.
C. Generation of Adversarial Observations
Upon determining {ai}i∈M, our objective is to create an
adversarial perturbation utilizing this information. This pertur-
bation is designed to prompt the victim agent to execute the
worst-case joint actions.
Numerous targeted attack methods have been proposed in the
context of classiﬁcation tasks, such as studies [38], [39], [40],
and [41]. These methods typically involve introducing pertur-
bations to input samples and manipulating the neural network
output to align with a speciﬁc target label. In our scenario, we can
utilize a comparable strategy to create adversarial perturbations
by leveraging the policy of victim agents, leading them to make
the targeted actions. This objective is pursued by minimizing
the subsequent loss function
Lsa

θi, ˆoi
= min
ˆoi∈Bi

(1 −β)

πθi

ai|ˆoi
−ˆai2
−β

πθi

ai|ˆoi
−πθi

zi|oi2
(16)
where zi represents the action taken by victim agent i based
on the clean observation, θi denotes the parameters of the
policy network for victim agent i, ˆai signiﬁes the target action
for victim agent i, ˆoi represents the perturbed observation for
agent i, and β is trad-off between both parts. This optimization
Fig. 2.
Illustration of CUME.
objective aims to guide the victim agent toward an action
closer to the target while deviating from its true action.
Given the heightened complexity of generating perturbations
in continuous action space compared to discrete ones, we
employ either U2-step PGD [41] or SGLD [47] to tackle this
optimization problem. The formulations for both methods are
presented separately
ˆoi
u+1 = clip

ˆoi
u −αsgn

∇ˆoiuLsa

θi, ˆoi
u, ˆai
|ˆoi
0=oi
(17)
ˆoi
u+1 = clip

ˆoi
u −α

∇ˆoiuLsa

θi, ˆoi
u, ˆai
+ ηu

|ˆoi
0=oi (18)
where α is the step size, u is u-step calculation of gradient, and
η is the noise. AMCA is realized in Algorithm 4 and illustrated
in Fig 1. Based on two critical agent selection methods (i.e.,
GI and DE) and two target attack methods (i.e., PGD and
SGLD), there are four AMCA variants, written as AMCA_GP,
AMCA_GS, AMCA_DP, and AMCA_DS.
Theorem 2: If the time complexity of the sampling action of
each agent is w1 and computing the gradient of (15) is w2, the
training time complexity of SJAV is O(T2Nw1 +(T2 −BS)w2)
If the time complexity of computing one-step the gradient
of (13) is w3, and computing ˜Qjt is w4, the time complexity
of Algorithms 1 and 2 is W2 = O(U1w3 + ciw4) and W3 =
O(T1|D|w4), respectively.
If the time complexity of computing one-step the gradient
of (17) and (18) is w5 and w6, respectively, four AMCA
variants have the following run-time complexity:
O(T3(W2 + U2w5)), O(T3(W2 + U2w6))
O(T3(W3 + U2w5)), and O(T3(W3 + U2w6)).
V. EXPERIMENTS
A. Experiment Settings
1) Environment Settings: We have conducted an extensive
evaluation of our AMCA. The evaluation uses a collabora-
tive multi-UAV environment (CMUE) [7], [8] and multiagent
MuJoCo (MAMuJoCo) [11] to demonstrate its effectiveness
via industry-related environments and multiagent particle envi-
ronments (MPEs) [18] to demonstrate its generality as follows.
CMUE: As illustrated in Fig. 2, this entails a cooperative
transportation scenario involving two UAVs tasked with trans-
porting an object to speciﬁed targets. The task imposes two
constraints: the UAVs must maintain a minimum separation
to avoid collisions, and simultaneously, they should not be
excessively distant from each other to prevent the object
from breaking away. The studies [7], [8] utilize images as
inputs, employing a perception-control modularization. The
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Texas at Arlington. Downloaded on June 27,2026 at 06:35:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

ZHOU et al.: ADVERSARIAL ATTACKS ON MADRL MODELS IN CONTINUOUS ACTION SPACE
7639
Fig. 3.
Results of the visual representation attack on FACMAC-trained models. The x-axis denotes the number of victims, while the y-axis quantiﬁes the
average reward.
Fig. 4.
Results of the visual representation attack on MADDPG-trained models. The x-axis denotes the number of victims, while the y-axis quantiﬁes the
average reward.
TABLE I
RESULTS OF DIFFERENT POPULATION SIZES IN THE HUMANOID
SCENARIO, WHERE WE TEST THE ROBUSTNESS OF FACMAC AGAINST
AMCA_DP IN 100 EPISODES
ﬁrst module employs DNN for object detection, while the
second module uses MADRL for UAV navigation toward the
target. Considering that adversarial attacks always use the GI
of neural networks, we simplify it to use one module. Instead
of images, we use GPS location and angle of yaw velocity
as inputs. The action space and reward function are the same
as [7] and [8].
MAMuJoCo: It represents an extension of the single-agent
robotic MuJoCo framework [48], wherein the singular robot
body is partitioned into disjoint subgraphs. Each subgraph
is then controlled by an individual agent. We use two-agent
Humanoid and four-agent Ant in our experiments denoted
as Humanoid and Ant scenarios, separately. Each agent’s
observation is a 16-D vector in the Humanoid scenario and a
7-D vector in the Ant scenario.
MPE: We use two continuous predator-prey scenarios where
there are three agents and one prey, and six agents and two
prey denoted as 3a and 6a scenarios, separately. Each agent’s
observation is represented by a 16-D vector for the 3a scenario
and a 30-D vector for the 6a scenario.
2) Benchmark Methods: MADDPG and FACMAC agents
trained for two million steps are used as victims. We
benchmark AMCA against the following methods.
Random Noise (RN): Random perturbations (e.g., a uniform
distribution noise) are added to the victim’s observation to
disrupt their decision-making process.
FGSM, PGD, and SGLD [38], [41], [47]: The adversary
crafts adversarial perturbations based on gradients computed
with respect to the victim’s policy network. These methods
focus on disrupting individual policies without considering the
impact on the team’s cumulative reward. Their objective is
to induce the victim to take actions inconsistent with those
derived from clean observations. For PGD and SGLD, we set
the optimization steps to 20.
ATLA [27]: The adversary is trained using proximal policy
optimization (PPO) in [49] for the single-agent case. In the
multiagent case, we employ multiagent PPO (MAPPO) [50] as
adversaries. For MAPPO agents, the clean observation serves
as the input, the adversarial observation as action, and the
reward is the negative of the victimized team’s performance.
All agents are victims during the training process.
PAAD [28]: The adversary undergoes a two-step training
process: ﬁrst, the worst-case joint action is advised, and then
the adversarial observation is generated according to this
action. In the single-agent scenario, the director is a PPO
agent. MADRL directors are trained using the same method
(MADDPG or FACMAC) as the victims, and all agents are
victims during the training process.
3) Perturbation Settings and Population Size: The pertur-
bation is deﬁned as an ℓ∞norm with magnitudes set to
0.1, 0.5, and 0.02 across the CMUE, MAMuJoCo, and MPE.
Within the AMCA framework, the victim set is dynamically
changed at each time step. Randomization is employed to alter
the victim set in the benchmark methods to ensure fairness. A
total of 100 episodes are conducted, and the evaluation metric
involves the utilization of average team cumulative rewards to
assess the efﬁcacy of the applied attack methods. Additionally,
the evaluation metrics, such as the successful rate (SR), too
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Texas at Arlington. Downloaded on June 27,2026 at 06:35:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

7640
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SYSTEMS, MAN, AND CYBERNETICS: SYSTEMS, VOL. 54, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2024
TABLE II
VICTIMS ARE TRAINED BY FACMAC AND MADDPG IN CMUE. WE USE REWARD, SR, TFR, AND CR AS THE EVALUATION CRITERIA. ACHIEVING
LOWER VALUES IN REWARD AND SR IS PREFERABLE, WHILE HIGHER VALUES IN TFR AND CR ARE DESIRABLE. BOLD SCORES HIGHLIGHT
SUPERIOR PERTURBING ABILITY. HERE, M DENOTES THE NUMBER OF VICTIMS
TABLE III
VICTIMS ARE TRAINED BY FACMAC IN MAMUJOCO. WE USE REWARD
AS THE EVALUATION CRITERIA. A LOWER REWARD INDICATES
SUPERIOR PERTURBING ABILITY, WITH BOLD SCORES DENOTING THE
OPTIMAL OUTCOMES. HERE, M SIGNIFIES THE NUMBER OF VICTIMS
far rate (TFR), and collide rate (CR) for a comprehensive
evaluation within the CMUE environment.
The choice of population size is a hyperparameter inﬂu-
encing the search process. Demonstrating Table I, we observe
that a larger population provides a more extensive exploration
of the solution space, enhancing the search coverage. This
broader exploration, however, comes at the cost of increased
computational demands. Conversely, a smaller population con-
strains the search range and may be appropriate for scenarios
with limited resources. It is essential to note that a smaller
population does not guarantee the discovery of the optimal
solution. Therefore, we set the population size as 400 in the
TABLE IV
VICTIMS ARE TRAINED BY FACMAC AND MADDPG IN MPE. WE USE
REWARD AS THE EVALUATION CRITERIA. A LOWER REWARD INDICATES
SUPERIOR PERTURBING ABILITY, WITH BOLD SCORES DENOTING THE
OPTIMAL OUTCOMES. HERE, M SIGNIFIES THE NUMBER OF VICTIMS
CMUE and MAMuJoCo environments and 200 in the MPE
environment. The code is available at: https://github.com/zhou-
ziyuan/RTCA.
B. Results and Discussions
The results of the experiments are detailed in Tables II–IV.
For a more visual representation of the experimental ﬁndings,
refer to Figs. 3 and 4, which contain cases where none of the
agents perturbed. The attacks on MADDPG-based models are
not conducted in the MAMuJoCo environment due to their
suboptimal performance. The objective of IGM in MADRL
is to address the issue of passive agents and promote fair
and balanced contributions from each agent to the overall
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Texas at Arlington. Downloaded on June 27,2026 at 06:35:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

ZHOU et al.: ADVERSARIAL ATTACKS ON MADRL MODELS IN CONTINUOUS ACTION SPACE
7641
team objectives. However, our experimental results indicate
that strategically selecting critical agents as victims is superior
overall performance to random selection. That is to say, the
contributions of each agent to the team are different.
As depicted in Fig. 3, AMCA outperforms other bench-
marks in attacking FACMAC. FACMAC exhibits superior
performance compared to MADDPG, particularly in complex
scenarios, such as 3a and 6a. However, when subjected
to perturbing employing RN and untargeted gradient-based
methods, the victim agent may exhibit improved performance
compared to the normal case, as observed in scenarios 3a,
Humanoid, and Ant. This phenomenon can be attributed to
the insufﬁcient quality of the policy trained by FACMAC,
resulting in suboptimal GI for guiding decision making.
Therefore, AMCA has the potential to assist in designing a
more robust system than the others.
As shown in Fig. 4, AMCA does not consistently exhibit
superior performance, such as in the CUME environment with
two victims. This observed deviation can be attributed to the
MADDPG model being trained with a centralized critic, intro-
ducing a difference between the distinct agents. Consequently,
the SJAV may not effectively represent the action values
of MADDPG compared to its performance with FACMAC.
However, it is crucial to highlight that, across the majority of
scenarios, AMCA demonstrates superior perturbing ability.
Furthermore, it is evident from the results that the DE
and PGD-based variants of AMCA consistently demonstrate
superior performance compared to other methods. The efﬁcacy
of DE, known for its global optimization approach, uses a
one-step way to advise the critical agents along with their
corresponding worst-case joint actions. On the other hand,
the GI-based AMCA involves a two-step process, wherein the
worst-case joint actions are generated upon the team’s overall
performance. When employing combinatorial optimization for
critical agent selection, it potentially leads to joint actions of
victims and normal agents may not always depict the team’s
worst-case situations. These are the advantages of DE and
PGD-based strategies within the AMCA framework.
The impact of RN attacks is very weak, with instances
where it unexpectedly enhances the cumulative rewards of
the victim. This observation suggests the presence of noise-
induced positive effects on the decision-making process of
MADRL. As a result, such methods may not be conducive to
effectively identifying robustness faults in MADRL. Similarly,
the ATLA method exhibits unsatisfactory results comparable to
RN. This outcome is attributed to the exponential expansion of
the joint observation space with the growing number of agents
in multiagent tasks. Consequently, learning the relationship
between clean observations and their respective joint actions
(i.e., joint adversarial observations) becomes a challenging
task for MAPPO agents. Moreover, when the agent’s policy
is suboptimal, untargeted gradient-based methods like PGD
and SGLD generate perturbations based on inaccurate GI.
Consequently, such perturbations fail to mislead victims into
making the worst-case joint actions. In summary, we conclude
the following.
1) RN, while slightly decreasing teamwork performance in
some scenarios, sometimes even leads to better joint
TABLE V
ATTACKING RESULTS ON DEFENSE POLICIES. WE CONDUCT
EXPERIMENTS UNDER SCENARIO 6A USING REWARD AS THE
EVALUATION CRITERION. A LOWER REWARD INDICATES SUPERIOR
PERTURBING ABILITY, WITH BOLD SCORES DENOTING THE OPTIMAL
OUTCOMES. HERE, WE SET M AS 1
actions. Due to its weak attack ability, it cannot be used
to test the robustness of the model.
2) FGSM, PGD, and SGLD do not consider teamwork
during the attack process; they only result in suboptimal
actions by individual agents. However, suboptimal indi-
vidual action may not necessarily lead to team failure
and, in some cases, can have positive impacts on team
decision making. Consequently, this method exhibits
limited perturbation capabilities.
3) ATLA faces challenges due to its large action space,
hindering the generation of adversarial observation.
4) PAAD takes into account the impact of victims on the
team; however, it requires certainty about the victim.
When the victims change, it has to retrain the adver-
saries.
5) AMCA considers the impact of individual actions on the
team and dynamically selects critical agents to attack,
demonstrating stronger perturbation ability than existing
methods. Furthermore, the dynamic victim agent selec-
tion enhances the stealthiness of attack, thereby allowing
engineers to test a model’s robustness better.
C. Attacking Results on Defense Policies
In order to evaluate AMCA’s performance in terms of
attacking other models trained by robust methods, we choose
FACMAC with robust training by ATLA [27] and PAAD [28]
as the victims, which are written as FACMAC_ATLA and
FACMAC_PAAD, respectively. However, when we conduct
the experiments in CUME and MAMuJoCo, the performance
of the model by adversarial training decreases signiﬁcantly
on clean samples. For example, in the four Ant scenario, the
model trained by FACMAC_PAAD only achieves a reward of
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Texas at Arlington. Downloaded on June 27,2026 at 06:35:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

7642
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SYSTEMS, MAN, AND CYBERNETICS: SYSTEMS, VOL. 54, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2024
TABLE VI
ABLATION STUDY ASSESSING THE ROBUSTNESS OF FACMAC THROUGH
AN EXAMINATION OF ITS ACTION-VALUE FUNCTIONS
−3000 without any attacks. There is no point in attacking a
model that performs poorly on clean observations. Therefore,
we conduct the experiments in MPE. The results are shown
in Table V.
The
models
trained
by
FACMAC_ATLA
and
FACMAC_PAAD perform worse than FACMAC without
any perturbation. In attacks where critical agents are not
considered, i.e., when agents are randomly selected for attack,
the loss in model performance is not signiﬁcant compared to
the case without perturbations. This indicates that the models
trained by these two adversarial training methods are robust
against state perturbations. However, they perform poorly
under our attack framework. Furthermore, in scenario 3a,
although the models trained by the aforementioned methods
exhibit robustness to a certain extent, their performance
is poor even given clean observations, even worse than
the performance of FACMAC under the strongest attack.
Therefore, the disadvantages of existing defensive methods
can be summarized as follows.
1) While the robustness can be improved, the performance
of the model in the clean state is severely degraded.
2) The importance of an agent in the training process is
not considered, thus, making the defense against our
framework ineffective.
Considering the shortcomings, we plan to propose more
general and robust training methods in our future work.
D. Ablation Study
We employ the mixing network within FACMAC to assess
the inﬂuence of ˜Qjt. The results are presented in Table VI.
Analysis of the experimental results reveals that, in the 3a sce-
nario, employing ˜Qjt has superior perturbing ability compared
to using the mixing network. Conversely, in the 6a scenario,
the mixing network outperforms ˜Qjt. In Humanoid and Ant
scenarios, their perturbing abilities are generally comparable,
with ˜Qjt exhibiting superior perturbing ability when selecting
two critical agents in the Ant scenario. As a result, the SJAV
TABLE VII
TRANSFERABILITY OF ˜Qjt. ROWS REPRESENT VICTIMS AND COLUMNS
DENOTE THE LEARNED SJVA BASED ON EACH VICTIM
TABLE VIII
SCALABILITY OF AMCA
function is effective in evaluating the impact of an agent’s
action on team rewards.
E. Transferability of ˜Qjt
This section aims to evaluate the transferability of the
function ˜Qjt. In this context, transferability is construed as the
capacity of ˜Qjt, trained using data sampled by one MADRL
paradigm, to effectively apply acquired knowledge to another
MADRL paradigm and successfully have adversarial attacks
based on it. The results delineated in Table VII reveal that
˜Qjt, which is acquired through the policy sampling under
FACMAC, is highly effective in attacking MADDPG models
in most of the scenarios considered. Similarly, ˜Qjt trained
using the trajectory of MADDPG also exhibits high rates of
successful attack FACMAC models in the majority of cases.
These ﬁndings have substantial implications for enhancing the
practicality of adversarial attacks. In summary, the SJAV-based
˜Qjt has favorable transferability attributes, making its consid-
erable potential for application as limited-access adversarial
attacks.
F. Scalability of AMCA
To
ensure
the
covert
nature
of
attacks,
adversaries
strategically target a minimal subset of critical agents,
thereby inducing suboptimal overall system performance.
Simultaneously, concentrating the attack on fewer victim
agents enhances the challenge of detecting the malicious activ-
ity. Our experimental design the number of victims to a mere
one or two critical agent. For instance, within the 6a scenario,
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Texas at Arlington. Downloaded on June 27,2026 at 06:35:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

ZHOU et al.: ADVERSARIAL ATTACKS ON MADRL MODELS IN CONTINUOUS ACTION SPACE
7643
TABLE IX
CPU TIME, RUN TIME, AND MEMORY PROFILING. THE UNIT OF
RUNTIME IS SECONDS AND THE UNIT OF MEMORY IS KB
which has a total of six agents, the critical agents become
unimportant when the entirety of the agent is perturbed (e.g.,
with six victim agents). To showcase the scalability of AMCA,
we undertake experiments within the 6a scenario, as delineated
in Table VIII. As the victim count increases, the advantage
derived from critical agents diminishes, yet AMCA has the
best outcomes.
G. Computational Resources
In scenario 6a, we measure the CPU time, running time,
and memory usage of the program when attacking one agent
and six agents, respectively. We conduct ten episodes, each
consisting of 25 time steps, to calculate these metrics. Table IX
demonstrates that the number of victim agents does not sig-
niﬁcantly affect resource consumption and runtime. Thus, our
approach exhibits scalability despite resource constraints. DE
and target attack steps involve multiple iterations, including
DNN calculations and gradient computations, leading to longer
execution times compared to the baseline. Regarding memory
consumption, ATLA and PAAD need to load the DNN models
of the adversary, and thus require more memory.
VI. CONCLUSION
This article has addressed the challenges of adversarial
attacks on models trained by MADRL in continuous action
space by presenting a novel framework called AMCA. The
framework incorporates gradient-based methods and DE to
identify critical agents, offering insights into worst-case joint
actions. SJAV is introduced and its convergence is proved.
The function learned by SJAV serves as an optimal objective
for critical agent identiﬁcation. Furthermore, target attacks,
PGD, and SGLD, are employed to generate perturbations for
critical agents. Experimental results conducted across CUME,
MAMuJoCo, and MPE demonstrate the efﬁcacy of AMCA in
disrupting cooperation policies by attacking only one or two
agents.
Our future work intends to investigate the loss functions and
optimization methods for target attacks in continuous action
space. Another one is to develop adaptive defense algorithms
against the AMCA to create more robust MADRL models.
Additionally, considering the real-world applications, there are
some challenges as follows.
1)
The attack method may cause signiﬁcant damage in
practical scenarios, particularly in domains like UAVs
and autonomous driving [55], [56]. Consequently, apply-
ing noise directly to real-world settings to test the
effectiveness of the attack method might not be feasible.
2)
Integrating noise obtained from simulation environ-
ments into real sensor inputs poses a considerable
challenge. In addressing these challenges, our future
work aims to bridge the gap between simulation and
real-world deployment to provide more attack methods
for real-world scenarios, thus prompting the birth of
more robust defense methods.
For Challenge 1), we aim to optimize the targeted attack
method such that, during real-world testing, the noise causes
the agent to make suboptimal decisions without resulting
in signiﬁcant harm. For Challenge 2), we plan to address
the sim-to-real gap by leveraging meta-learning or domain
randomization techniques, thereby generating noise that is
more applicable to real-world environments.
APPENDIX
PROOF OF THEOREM 1
To prove Theorem 1, we need the following lemma:
Lemma 1 [51]: Assuming the form of a stochastic process
t is given by t+1(x) = (1−αt(x))t(x)+αt(x)Ft(x), where
the following conditions are satisﬁed, it converges to 0.
1) 
t αt(x) = ∞,
2) 
t α2
t (x) < ∞,
3) ∥E[Ft(x)]∥q ≤γ ∥t∥q,
4) var(Ft(x)) ≤C(1 + ∥t∥2
q).
Then we prove Theorem 1 which is similar to [52], [53],
[54, Th. 1].
Proof of Theorem 1:
Note
˜Qt+1(s, a) = ˜Qt(s, a) + αt(s, a)

rt + γ ˜Qt

s′, a′
−˜Qt(s, a)

. (19)
Because conditions 1) and 2) hold, let t(s, a) = ˜Qt(s, a)−
˜Q∗(s, a). Then
t+1 = (1 −αt(s, a))t(s, a)
+ αt(s, a)[rt + γ ˜Qt(s′, a′) −˜Q∗(s, a)].
(20)
We deﬁne that Ft(s, a) = r(s, a) + γ ˜Qt(s′, a′) −˜Q∗(s, a).
Given the environment’s state transition probability distribu-
tion, calculate the expectation as follows:
E[Ft(s, a)] = r(s, a) + γ

s′∈S
p

s′|s, a
 ˜Qt

s′, a′
−˜Q∗(s, a). (21)
Deﬁne the operator H as
H ˜Qt(s, a) = r(s, a) + γ

s′∈S
p

s′|s, a
 ˜Qt

s′, a′
.
(22)
For the optimal action-value function ˜Q∗(s, a), according to
the deﬁnition, it reaches a convergence point under iterations
of the H iteration operator (otherwise, it would undergo further
iterative optimization). This can be expressed as ˜Q∗(s, a) =
H ˜Q∗(s, a) and E[Ft(s, a)] = H ˜Qt(s, a) −H ˜Q∗(s, a).
Our greedy strategy satisﬁes the condition of greed in the
limit with inﬁnite Exploration. As t →∞, exploration is
no longer needed. At this point, the initially learned policy
satisﬁes π(s) = arg maxa ˜Q(s, a), then
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Texas at Arlington. Downloaded on June 27,2026 at 06:35:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

7644
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SYSTEMS, MAN, AND CYBERNETICS: SYSTEMS, VOL. 54, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2024
∥H ˜Q −H ˜Q′∥∞= max
s∈S |(r(s, a) + γ

s′∈S
p

s′|s, a

Q

s′, π(s′)

−

r(s, a) + γ

s′∈S
p(s′|s, a) ˜Q′(s′, π(s′))

|
= max
s∈S |maxa′{(r(s, a) + γ

s′∈S
p

s′|s, a

Q

s′a′
}
−max
a′ {(r(s, a) + γ

s′∈S
p

s′|s, a
 ˜Q′
s′, a′
}|
≤γ maxs∈S|

s′∈S
p

s′|s, a

˜Q(s′, a′) −˜Q′(s′, a′)

|
≤γ max
s∈S

s′∈S
p

s′|s, a

max
s′,a′ | ˜Q

s′, a′
−˜Q′
s′, a′
|
= γ ∥˜Q −˜Q′∥∞.
(23)
Next, based on the deﬁnition of random variable methods,
we can further deduce
var[Ft(s, a)] = E

(Ft(s, a) −E[Ft(s, a)])2
= E

r(s, a) + γ ˜Qt(s′, a′) −˜Q∗(s, a) −H ˜Qt(s, a) + H ˜Q∗(s, a)
2
= E

r(s, a) + γ ˜Qt(s′, a′) −H ˜Qt(s, a)
2
= E
⎡
⎣

r(s, a) + γ ˜Qt(s′, a′) −r(s, a) −γ

s′∈S
p(s′|s, a) ˜Qt(s′, a′)
2⎤
⎦
= var

r(s, a) + γ ˜Qt

s′, a′
.
(24)
When t →∞, π(s) = argmaxa∈A ˜Q(s, a), and thus we have
var[Ft(s, a)] = var

r(s, a) + γ argmaxa′∈A ˜Qt

s′, a′
. (25)
Due to the reward function r(s, a) is bounded, there has a
constant C such that var[Ft(s, a)] ≤C(1 + ∥t∥)2
q.
Based on Lemma 1, t is convergent to 0. As a result, ˜Q
is convergent to ˜Q∗, i.e., Theorem 1 holds.
■
REFERENCES
[1] F.-Y. Wang, J. Yang, X. Wang, J. Li, and Q.-L. Han, “Chat with chatGPT
on industry 5.0: Learning and decision-making for intelligent industries,”
IEEE/CAA J. Automatica Sinica, vol. 10, no. 4, pp. 831–834, Apr. 2023.
[2] A.
del
Real
Torres,
D.
S.
Andreiana,
L.
Ojeda
Roldán,
A. Hernández Bustos, and L. E. A. Galicia, “A review of deep
reinforcement learning approaches for smart manufacturing in industry
4.0 and 5.0 framework,” Appl. Sci., vol. 12, no. 23, 2022, Art. no. 12377.
[Online]. Available: https://www.mdpi.com/2076-3417/12/23/12377
[3] C. Dong, M. Shaﬁq, M. M. A. Dabel, Y. Sun, and Z. Tian, “DNN
inference acceleration for smart devices in industry 5.0 by decentralized
deep reinforcement learning,” IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron., vol. 70,
no. 1, pp. 1519–1530, Feb. 2024.
[4] J. Luo, H. Shao, J. Lin, and B. Liu, “Meta-learning with elastic proto-
typical network for fault transfer diagnosis of bearings under unstable
speeds,” Rel. Eng. Sys. Saf., vol. 245, May 2024, Art. no. 110001.
[Online]. Available: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S0951832024000760
[5] J. Zhang, P. Zu, P. Qiu, and M. Zhou, “A new learning automaton
for selecting an arbitrary subset of actions,” IEEE Trans. Syst., Man,
Cybern., Syst., vol. 54, no. 1, pp. 568–577, Jan. 2024.
[6] Y. Xiao, H. Shao, J. Wang, S. Yan, and B. Liu, “Bayesian vari-
ational transformer: A generalizable model for rotating machinery
fault diagnosis,” Mech. Syst. Signal Process., vol. 207, Jan. 2024,
Art. no. 110936. [Online]. Available: https://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/S0888327023008440
[7] H. Shi, G. Liu, K. Zhang, Z. Zhou, and J. Wang, “MARL Sim2real
transfer: Merging physical reality with digital virtuality in metaverse,”
IEEE Trans. Syst., Man, Cybern., Syst., vol. 53, no. 4, pp. 2107–2117,
Apr. 2023.
[8] S. Chen, G. Liu, Z. Zhou, K. Zhang, and J. Wang, “Robust multi-
agent reinforcement learning method based on adversarial domain
Randomization for real-world dual-UAV cooperation,” IEEE Trans.
Intell. Veh., vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 1615–1627, Jan. 2024.
[9] Z. Zhang, Y. Sun, F. Huang, and F. Miao, “Safe and robust multi-agent
reinforcement learning for connected autonomous vehicles under state
perturbations,” 2023, arXiv:2309.11057.
[10] F. Zhang, M. Zhou, and L. Qi, “Distributed and coordinated model
predictive control for channel resource allocation in cooperative
vehicle safety systems,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 11, no. 11,
pp. 19328–19343, Jun. 2024.
[11] B. Peng et al., “FACMAC: Factored multi-agent Centralised policy
gradients,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
vol. 34, M. Ranzato, A. Beygelzimer, Y. Dauphin, P. Liang, and
J. W. Vaughan, Eds., Red Hook, NY, USA: Curran Assoc., Inc., 2021,
pp. 12208–12221. [Online]. Available: https://proceedings.neurips.cc/
paper_ﬁles/paper/2021/ﬁle/65b9eea6e1cc6bb9f0cd2a47751a186f-Paper.
pdf
[12] W. Zhao, E.-A. Rantala, J. Pajarinen, and J. P. Queralta, “Less is more:
Robust robot learning via partially observable multi-agent reinforcement
learning,” 2023, arXiv:2309.1479.
[13] Z. Pu, T. Zhang, X. Ai, T. Qiu, and J. Yi, “A deep reinforcement
learning approach combined with model-based paradigms for multiagent
formation control with collision avoidance,” IEEE Trans. Syst., Man,
Cybern., Syst., vol. 53, no. 7, pp. 4189–4204, Jul. 2023.
[14] L.
Huang,
M.
Zhou,
and
K.
Hao,
“Non-dominated
immune-
endocrine short feedback algorithm for multi-robot maritime patrolling,”
IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 21, no. 1, pp. 362–373,
Jan. 2020.
[15] R. Hare and Y. Tang, “Hierarchical deep reinforcement learning with
experience sharing for metaverse in education,” IEEE Trans. Syst., Man,
Cybern., Syst., vol. 53, no. 4, pp. 2047–2055, Apr. 2023.
[16] P. Sunehag et al., “Value-decomposition networks for cooperative multi-
agent learning based on team reward,” in Proc. 17th Int. Conf. Auton.
Agents MultiAgent Syst., 2018, pp. 2085–2087.
[17] T. Rashid, M. Samvelyan, C. S. De Witt, G. Farquhar, J. Foerster, and
S. Whiteson, “Monotonic value function factorisation for deep multi-
agent reinforcement learning,” J. Mach. Learn. Res., vol. 21, no. 1,
pp. 1–51, Jan. 2020.
[18] R. Lowe, Y. Wu, A. Tamar, J. Harb, O. P. Abbeel, and I. Mordatch,
“Multi-agent actor-critic for mixed cooperative-competitive environ-
ments,” in Proc. 31st Int. Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2017,
pp. 6382–6393.
[19] P. Dai, W. Yu, H. Wang, and S. Baldi, “Distributed actor–critic
algorithms for multiagent reinforcement learning over directed graphs,”
IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 34, no. 10, pp. 7210–7221,
Oct. 2023.
[20] J. Guo, Y. Chen, Y. Hao, Z. Yin, Y. Yu, and S. Li, “Towards
comprehensive testing on the robustness of cooperative multi-agent
reinforcement learning,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern
Recognit. (CVPR) Workshops, Jun. 2022, pp. 115–122.
[21] S. He, S. Han, S. Su, S. Han, S. Zou, and F. Miao, “Robust multi-agent
reinforcement learning with state uncertainty,” in Proc. Trans. Mach.
Learn. Res., 2023, pp. 1–50. [Online]. Available: https://openreview.net/
forum?id=CqTkapZ6H9
[22] J. Lin, K. Dzeparoska, S. Q. Zhang, A. Leon-Garcia, and N. Papernot,
“On the robustness of cooperative multi-agent reinforcement learn-
ing,” in Proc. IEEE Security Privacy Workshops (SPW), 2020,
pp. 62–68.
[23] Z. Zhou, G. Liu, and M. Zhou, “A robust mean-ﬁeld actor-critic
reinforcement learning against adversarial perturbations on agent states,”
IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., early access, Jun. 5, 2023,
doi:10.1109/TNNLS.2023.3278715.
[24] W. Guo, G. Liu, Z. Zhou, L. Wang, and J. Wang, “Enhancing the
robustness of QMIX against state-adversarial attacks,” Neurocomputing,
vol. 572, Mar. 2024, Art. no. 127191. [Online]. Available: https://www.
sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0925231223013140
[25] S. Huang, N. Papernot, I. Goodfellow, Y. Duan, and P. Abbeel,
“Adversarial
attacks
on
neural
network
policies,”
2017,
arXiv:1702.02284.
[26] H.
Zhang
et
al.,
“Robust
deep
reinforcement
learning
against
adversarial
perturbations
on
state
observations,”
in
Advances
in
Neural Information
Processing
Systems,
vol. 33, H.
Larochelle,
M. Ranzato, R. Hadsell, M. Balcan, and H. Lin, Eds., Red Hook,
NY, USA: Curran Assoc., Inc., 2020, pp. 21024–21037. [Online].
Available:
https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_ﬁles/paper/2020/ﬁle/
f0eb6568ea114ba6e293f903c34d7488-Paper.pdf
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Texas at Arlington. Downloaded on June 27,2026 at 06:35:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

ZHOU et al.: ADVERSARIAL ATTACKS ON MADRL MODELS IN CONTINUOUS ACTION SPACE
7645
[27] H. Zhang, H. Chen, D. S. Boning, and C. Hsieh, “Robust reinforcement
learning on state observations with learned optimal adversary,” in Proc.
9th Int. Conf. Learn. Represent., 2021, pp. 1–16. [Online]. Available:
https://openreview.net/forum?id=sCZbhBvqQaU
[28] Y. Sun, R. Zheng, Y. Liang, and F. Huang, “Who is the strongest enemy?
Towards optimal and efﬁcient evasion attacks in deep RL,” in Proc. 10th
Int. Conf. Learn. Represent., 2022, pp. 1–40. [Online]. Available: https://
openreview.net/forum?id=JM2kFbJvvI
[29] T. Franzmeyer et al., “Illusory attacks: Information-theoretic detectabil-
ity matters in adversarial attacks,” in Proc. 12th Int. Conf. Learn.
Represent., 2024, pp. 1–20. [Online]. Available: https://openreview.net/
forum?id=F5dhGCdyYh
[30] X. Liu, S. Chakraborty, Y. Sun, and F. Huang, “Rethinking adversarial
policies: A generalized attack formulation and provable defense in RL,”
in Proc. 12th Int. Conf. Learn. Represent., 2024, pp. 1–26. [Online].
Available: https://openreview.net/forum?id=pDCublKPmG
[31] M. Yang, G. Liu, Z. Zhou, and J. Wang, “Probabilistic automata-
based method for enhancing performance of deep reinforcement learning
systems,” IEEE/CAA J. Automatica Sinica, submitted to publication,
doi: 10.1109/JAS.2024.124818.
[32] Z. Zhou and G. Liu, “Robustness testing for multi-agent reinforcement
learning: State perturbations on critical agents,” in Proc. 26th Eur.
Conf. Artif. Intell., vol. 372, 2023, pp. 3131–3139. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.3233/FAIA230632
[33] S. Han et al., “What is the solution for state-adversarial multi-agent rein-
forcement learning?” in Proc. Trans. Mach. Learn. Res., 2024, pp. 1–37.
[Online]. Available: https://openreview.net/forum?id=HyqSwNhM3x
[34] D. S. Bernstein, R. Givan, N. Immerman, and S. Zilberstein, “The
complexity of decentralized control of Markov decision processes,”
Math. Oper. Res., vol. 27, no. 4, pp. 819–840, 2002.
[35] K. Son, D. Kim, W. J. Kang, D. E. Hostallero, and Y. Yi, “QTRAN:
Learning to Factorize with transformation for cooperative multi-agent
reinforcement learning,” in Proc. 36th Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., vol. 97,
Jun. 2019, pp. 5887–5896. [Online]. Available: https://proceedings.mlr.
press/v97/son19a.html
[36] T. P. Lillicrap et al., “Continuous control with deep reinforcement
learning,” in Proc. 4th Int. Conf. Learn. Represent., 2016, pp. 1–10.
[37] S. Li et al., “Attacking cooperative multi-agent reinforcement learning
by adversarial minority inﬂuence,” 2023, arXiv:2302.03322.
[38] I. J. Goodfellow, J. Shlens, and C. Szegedy, “Explaining and harnessing
adversarial examples,” 2014, arXiv:1412.6572.
[39] Y. Jiao, K. Yang, and D. Song, “Distributed Distributionally robust
optimization
with
non-convex
objectives,”
in
Continuous
control
with deep reinforcement learning, vol. 35, S. Koyejo, S. Mohamed,
A. Agarwal, D. Belgrave, K. Cho, and A. Oh, Eds., Red Hook,
NY,
USA:
Curran
Assoc.,
Inc.,
2022,
pp. 7987–7999.
[Online].
Available:
https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_ﬁles/paper/2022/ﬁle/
34899013589ef41aea4d7b2f0ef310c1-Paper-Conference.pdf
[40] M. Li, C. Deng, T. Li, J. Yan, X. Gao, and H. Huang, “Towards
transferable targeted attack,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput.
Vis.
Pattern
Recognit.,
2020,
pp. 638–646.
[Online].
Available:
https://openaccess.thecvf.com/content_CVPR_2020/html/Li_Towards_
Transferable_Targeted_Attack_CVPR_2020_paper.html
[41] A. Madry, A. Makelov, L. Schmidt, D. Tsipras, and A. Vladu, “Towards
deep learning models resistant to adversarial attacks,” in Proc. 6th Int.
Conf. Learn. Represent., Vancouver, BC, Canada, May 2018, pp. 1–23.
[Online]. Available: https://openreview.net/forum?id=rJzIBfZAb
[42] R. Storn and K. Price, “Differential evolution—A simple and efﬁcient
heuristic for global optimization over continuous spaces,” J. Global
Optim., vol. 11, no. 4, pp. 341–359, Dec. 1997. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1023/A:1008202821328
[43] Bilal, M. Pant, H. Zaheer, L. Garcia-Hernandez, and A. Abraham,
“Differential evolution: A review of more than two decades of research,”
Eng. Appl. Artif. Intell., vol. 90, Apr. 2020, Art. no. 103479. [Online].
Available: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S09521976
2030004X
[44] K. R. Opara and J. Arabas, “Differential evolution: A survey of
theoretical analyses,” Swarm Evol. Comput., vol. 44, pp. 546–558,
Feb. 2019. [Online]. Available: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S2210650217304224
[45] J. Su, D. V. Vargas, and K. Sakurai, “One pixel attack for fooling
deep neural networks,” IEEE Trans. Evol. Comput., vol. 23, no. 5,
pp. 828–841, Oct. 2019.
[46] G. A. Rummery and M. Niranjan, “On-Line q-learning using connec-
tionist systems,” Dept. Eng., Univ. Cambridge, Cambridge, U.K., Rep.
TR-166, 1994.
[47] M. Welling and Y. Teh, “Bayesian learning via stochastic gradient
langevin dynamics,” in Proc. 28th Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2011,
pp. 681–688.
[48] E.
Todorov,
T.
Erez,
and
Y.
Tassa,
“MuJoCo:
A
physics
engine for model-based control,” in Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf.
Intell.
Robots
Syst.,
2012,
pp. 5026–5033.
[Online].
Available:
https://doi.org/10.1109/IROS.2012.6386109
[49] J. Schulman, F. Wolski, P. Dhariwal, A. Radford, and O. Klimov,
“Proximal policy optimization algorithms,” 2017, arXiv:1707.06347.
[50] C. Yu et al., “The surprising effectiveness of PPO in cooperative multi-
agent games,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
vol. 35, S. Koyejo, S. Mohamed, A. Agarwal, D. Belgrave, K. Cho,
and A. Oh, Eds., Red Hook, NY, USA: Curran Assoc., Inc., 2022,
pp. 24611–24624.
[Online].
Available:
https://proceedings.neurips.
cc/paper_ﬁles/paper/2022/ﬁle/9c1535a02f0ce079433344e14d910597-
Paper-Datasets_and_Benchmarks.pdf
[51] T. Jaakkola, M. I. Jordan, and S. P. Singh, “On the convergence of
stochastic iterative dynamic programming algorithms,” Neural Comput.,
vol. 6, no. 6, pp. 1185–1201, 1994, doi: 10.1162/neco.1994.6.6.1185.
[52] S. Singh, T. Jaakkola, M. L. Littman, and C. Szepesvári, “Convergence
results for single-step on-policy reinforcement-learning algorithms,”
Mach. Learn., vol. 38, no. 3, pp. 287–308, Mar. 2000. [Online].
Available: https://doi.org/10.1023/A:1007678930559
[53] F. S. Melo, Convergence of Q-Learning: A Simple Proof, Inst. Syst.
Robot., Instituto Superior Técnico, Lisboa, Portugal, 2001, pp. 1–4.
[54] H. van Seijen, H. van Hasselt, S. Whiteson, and M. Wiering, “A
theoretical and empirical analysis of expected SARSA,” in Proc. IEEE
Symp. Adapt. Dyn. Program. Reinforcement Learn., 2009, pp. 177–184.
[55] W. Duo et al., “Supremal and robust control against actuator jamming
attacks in cyber-physical systems,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Veh., early access,
Dec. 5, 2023. doi: 10.1109/TIV.2023.3339668.
[56] W. Duo, M. Zhou, and A. Abusorrah, “A survey of cyber attacks on
cyber physical systems: Recent advances and challenges,” IEEE/CAA J.
Automatica Sinica, vol. 9, no. 5, pp. 784–800, May 2022.
Ziyuan Zhou (Graduate Student Member, IEEE)
received the B.S. degree from the China University
of Mining and Technology, Xuzhou, China, in 2020.
She is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree in com-
puter software and theory with the Department
of Computer Science, Tongji University, Shanghai,
China.
She was a joint Ph.D. student with the Department
of Electrical and Computer Engineering, New Jersey
Institute of Technology, Newark, NJ, USA. Her
research interests include reinforcement learning,
multiagent systems, and adversarial attacks.
Guanjun Liu (Senior Member, IEEE) received the
Ph.D. degree in computer software and theory from
Tongji University, Shanghai, China, in 2011.
He was a Postdoctoral Research Fellow with the
Singapore University of Technology and Design,
Singapore, from 2011 to 2013, and a Postdoctoral
Research Fellow with the Humboldt University of
Berlin, Berlin, Germany, from 2013 to 2014, sup-
ported by the Alexander von Humboldt Foundation.
He is currently a Professor with the Department
of Computer Science, Tongji University. He has
authored over 160 papers and four books. His research interests include Petri
net theory, model checking, machine learning, multiagent systems, cyber–
physical systems, UAV, and credit card fraud detection.
Dr. Liu served as a Guest Editor for some journals, including the IEEE
TRANSACTIONS ON COMPUTATIONAL SOCIAL SYSTEMS, Mathematical
Problems in Engineering, Drones, and Journal of Software (in Chinese),
and also served as a program committee member for many international
conferences. He is currently an Associate Editor of IEEE TRANSACTIONS
ON COMPUTATIONAL SOCIAL SYSTEMS.
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Texas at Arlington. Downloaded on June 27,2026 at 06:35:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

7646
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SYSTEMS, MAN, AND CYBERNETICS: SYSTEMS, VOL. 54, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2024
Weiran Guo (Graduate Student Member, IEEE)
received the B.S. degree in information security
from Tongji University, Shanghai, China, in 2023,
where she is currently pursuing the M.S. degree in
computer software and theory with the Department
of Computer Science.
Her
current
research
interests
include
reinforcement learning and multiagent systems.
MengChu Zhou (Fellow, IEEE) received the B.S.
degree in control engineering from the Nanjing
University of Science and Technology, Nanjing,
China, in 1983, the M.S. degree in automatic
control from the Beijing Institute of Technology,
Beijing, China, in 1986, and the Ph.D. degree in
computer and systems engineering from Rensselaer
Polytechnic Institute, Troy, NY, USA, in 1990.
He joined New Jersey Institute of Technology,
Newark, NJ, USA, in 1990, and has been a
Distinguished Professor of Electrical and Computer
Engineering since 2013. He has over 1200 publications, including 17 books,
over 850 journal papers (over 650 in IEEE transactions), and 32 book chapters.
He holds 31 patents and several pending ones. His recently co-authored books,
include Learning Automata and their Applications to Intelligent Systems
(IEEE Press/Wiley, Hoboken, NJ, 2024 with J. Zhang), Device-Edge-Cloud
Continuum Paradigms, Architectures and Applications (Springer Nature, 2023
with C. Savaglio, G. Fortino, and J. Ma), and Sustainable Manufacturing
Systems: An Energy Perspective (IEEE Press/Wiley, Hoboken, Hoboken,
NJ, 2022 with L. Li). His research interests are in intelligent automation,
machine leaning, Petri nets, robotics, Internet of Things, big data, cloud/edge
computing, transportation, and energy systems.
Dr. Zhou is a recipient of Excellence in Research Prize and Medal from
NJIT, Humboldt Research Award for U.S. Senior Scientists from Alexander
von Humboldt Foundation, and the Franklin V. Taylor Memorial Award and
the Norbert Wiener Award from IEEE SMC Society, the Computer-Integrated
Manufacturing UNIVERSITY-LEAD Award from Society of Manufacturing
Engineers, the Distinguished Service Award from IEEE Robotics and
Automation Society, and the Edison Patent Award from the Research &
Development Council of New Jersey. He has been among most highly cited
scholars since 2012 and ranked top one in the ﬁeld of engineering worldwide
in 2012 by Web of Science. He was ranked #99 among the 2023 Top
1000 Scientists in Computer Science in the World, Research.com. He is a
Life Member of Chinese Association for Science and Technology—USA
and served as its President in 1999. He has led or participated in over 60
research and education projects with total budget over $12M, funded by
National Science Foundation, Department of Defense, NIST, New Jersey
Science and Technology Commission, and industry. He served as an Editor-
in-Chief of IEEE/CAA JOURNAL OF AUTOMATICA SINICA, an Associate
Editor of IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ROBOTICS AND AUTOMATION, IEEE
TRANSACTIONS ON AUTOMATION SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, and IEEE
TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, and an Editor of IEEE
TRANSACTIONS ON AUTOMATION SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING. He served
as a Guest-Editor for many journals, including IEEE INTERNET
OF
THINGS JOURNAL, IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL ELECTRONICS,
and IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SEMICONDUCTOR MANUFACTURING. He
is currently an Associate Editor of Research, IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON
INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS
JOURNAL, and Frontiers of Information Technology & Electronic Engineering.
He is a founding Chair/Co-chair of Technical Committee on AI-based Smart
Manufacturing Systems and Technical Committee on Humanized Crowd
Computing of IEEE Systems, Man, and Cybernetics Society, Technical
Committee on Semiconductor Manufacturing Automation and Technical
Committee on Digital Manufacturing and Human-Centered Automation of
IEEE Robotics and Automation Society. He is also a member of IEEE TAB
Periodicals Committee and Periodicals Review and Advisory Committee. He
was the General Chair of IEEE Conf. on Automation Science and Engineering,
Washington, DC, USA, August 23–26, 2008, the General Co-Chair of 2003
IEEE International Conference on System, Man and Cybernetics, Washington,
October 5–8, 2003 and 2019 IEEE International Conference on SMC,
Bari, Italy, October 6–9, 2019, the Founding General Co-Chair of 2004
IEEE Int. Conf. on Networking, Sensing and Control, Taipei, March 21–
23, 2004, and the General Chair of 2006 IEEE Int. Conf. on Networking,
Sensing and Control, Ft. Lauderdale, FL, USA. April 23–25, 2006. He
was Program Chair of 2010 IEEE International Conference on Mechatronics
and Automation, August 4–7, 2010, Xi’an, China, 1998 and 2001 IEEE
International Conference on SMC and 1997 IEEE International Conference on
Emerging Technologies and Factory Automation. He is Fellow of International
Federation of Automatic Control, American Association for the Advancement
of Science, Chinese Association of Automation, and National Academy of
Inventors.
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Texas at Arlington. Downloaded on June 27,2026 at 06:35:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
