Action-Oriented Adversarial Attacks on Trajectory Prediction in
Connected Autonomous Vehicles via Multi-Agent Reinforcement
Learning
Xiaofeng Zhaoa,∗, Dengfeng Suna
aSchool of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN 47906 USA
A R T I C L E I N F O
Keywords:
Multi-agent reinforcement learning
Connected autonomous vehicles
Trajectory prediction
Adversarial machine learning
Reliability evaluation
A B S T R A C T
Infrastructure-based trajectory prediction modules in connected and automated vehicle (CAV)
systems play a vital role in enabling safe and efficient navigation. However, their centralized
nature introduces a critical vulnerability: adversarial manipulation can simultaneously compro-
mise the safety of multiple autonomous agents. This paper proposes a novel framework—action-
oriented prediction-adversarial multi-agent reinforcement learning (AO-PA-MARL)—that gen-
erates bounded trajectory perturbations targeting infrastructure-level prediction models. Built
on the centralized training and decentralized execution (CTDE) paradigm, AO-PA-MARL
employs action-oriented optimization to coordinate attacks efficiently while mitigating the curse
of dimensionality in multi-agent trajectory spaces. We formalize the problem as a prediction-
adversarial Markov decision process (PA-MDP) and show the existence of an optimal adversarial
policy via Bellman contraction. Experiments in crowd navigation and highway on-ramp merging
environments demonstrate that AO-PA-MARL significantly outperforms baseline adversarial
methods, yielding improved training rewards and substantially higher collision rates. These re-
sults reveal vulnerabilities in prediction-based safety supervisors and demonstrate the scalability
and effectiveness of AO-PA-MARL as an adversarial evaluation tool for assessing the robustness
of trajectory planning models under realistic uncertainties in CAV systems.
1. Introduction
With the rapid advancement of connected and automated vehicles (CAVs), trajectory prediction has become a
central capability for ensuring safe and efficient navigation in intelligent transportation systems (Guo et al., 2025;
Hu et al., 2023; Zhou et al., 2024). Accurate forecasting of agents’ future states enables autonomous vehicles to
proactively anticipate risks, adjust to dynamic surroundings, and coordinate with others in complex traffic scenarios
(Cui et al., 2020; Huang et al., 2025; Ma et al., 2020). Modern CAV platforms increasingly rely on infrastructure-
assisted prediction and communication—via vehicle-to-infrastructure (V2I) links—to enhance situational awareness
and support cooperative planning (Chen et al., 2024a,b; Jiang and Shang, 2023; Zhang et al., 2023). Infrastructure-
assisted control policies have also been proposed to manage mixed-traffic intersections (Ying and Feng, 2024) and
freeway bottlenecks (Han and Zhang, 2025) through centralized prediction and planning. These systems often rely
on roadside units (RSUs) or cloud-connected edge servers to aggregate vehicle states, forecast trajectories, and issue
coordinated control decisions—assuming that this infrastructure layer is secure and trustworthy.
However, the centralization of prediction and control logic introduces new cybersecurity vulnerabilities. Infrastructure-
level components possess privileged access to aggregated trajectory information and planning interfaces, making them
attractive and impactful targets for attackers. Prior studies have shown that attacks on V2V or V2I communication
channels can destabilize platoons, induce unsafe spacing, or mislead cooperative behaviors (Comert et al., 2022;
Khattak et al., 2020; Li et al., 2024). We adopt a threat model grounded in these observations: the attacker compromises
the infrastructure-level trajectory prediction module (e.g., at an RSU), gaining access to predicted trajectories before
they are used by downstream safety logic. This scenario is consistent with real-world cyber-physical vulnerabilities
observed in vehicular networks, where RSUs and cloud services are exposed to risks such as outdated firmware, weak
authentication, and remote code execution (Rathore et al., 2022; Tanaji and Roychowdhury, 2024).
Our framework differs from previous adversarial frameworks by focusing on a black-box attacker who perturbs only
the output of the prediction model. This access level mirrors known attack surfaces, such as falsified V2X messages
∗Corresponding author
ORCID(s): 0009-0001-2390-2037 (X. Zhao)
Xiaofeng Zhao: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 1 of 13
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=5348784
Preprint not peer reviewed

or corrupted state estimates, without requiring any modification to onboard sensing or actuation (Khattak et al.,
2021; Sun et al., 2023). While prior adversarial approaches target perception noise, planning injection, or direct state
manipulation, our work focuses specifically on infrastructure-level trajectory forecasting—a relatively underexplored
but realistic attack surface in connected autonomous vehicles. Moreover, to ensure realism, the perturbations are
restricted to bounded deviations consistent with physical constraints and common uncertainty margins in trajectory
prediction (Chen et al., 2024b,c). Such modest but targeted manipulations can mislead safety supervisors and degrade
coordinated decision-making, especially in CAV systems that delegate control assistance to shared infrastructure—for
tasks such as cooperative merging, intersection scheduling, and freeway coordination (Han and Zhang, 2025; Shi
et al., 2021; Ying and Feng, 2024). In addition to modeling this infrastructure-level threat, our work aims to establish
a systematic framework for evaluating the robustness of trajectory planning models under realistic CAV conditions. In
practice, trajectory prediction must contend with a range of uncertainties—such as multi-agent interactions, stochastic
model behavior, adverse weather, and disturbances in vehicle dynamics (Li et al., 2019, 2020). Even minor deviations
in these inputs can propagate through the autonomy stack, leading to substantial prediction errors and performance
degradation. Therefore, developing methods to evaluate and enhance resilience against adversarial perturbations is
critical for the safety and reliability of future autonomous transportation systems.
To address these challenges, we introduce action-oriented prediction-adversarial multi-agent reinforcement learn-
ing (AO-PA-MARL), a novel adversarial framework that strategically perturbs infrastructure-generated trajectory
predictions to degrade the effectiveness of prediction-based safety mechanisms. Our approach is motivated by the
growing body of work that leverages multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) to enable coordinated behavior
among connected vehicles in real-world traffic applications—such as online parking assignment (Zhang et al., 2022),
mandatory lane changing (Wang and Others, 2023), intersection navigation (Bautista-Montesano and Others, 2022),
and cooperative merging on freeways (Shi et al., 2021). The method is built on the centralized training and decentralized
execution (CTDE) paradigm, which has shown strong performance in complex multi-agent decision-making scenarios,
including autonomous driving (Sumanth Nakka et al., 2022), robotic manipulation (Wang and Sagawa, 2022), and
strategic planning under uncertainty (Zhao et al., 2024). AO-PA-MARL extends the CTDE paradigm to adversarial
evaluation by training a multi-agent policy that learns to inject coordinated and physically bounded trajectory
perturbations. These perturbations are designed to remain plausible to the safety supervisor, yet systematically mislead
downstream planning modules. We formalize the setting as a prediction-adversarial Markov decision process (PA-
MDP), show the existence of an optimal adversarial policy under Bellman contraction, and introduce an action-oriented
perturbation strategy to mitigate the curse of dimensionality in continuous trajectory spaces. Experiments in both crowd
navigation and highway on-ramp merging environments demonstrate that AO-PA-MARL induces substantially higher
collision rates than baseline adversarial methods, validating its effectiveness as a security stress test.
Our approach is model-agnostic and operates entirely at the prediction output level, making it broadly compatible
with diverse trajectory forecasting modules. Unlike gradient-based adversarial attacks (Cao et al., 2022), which
require white-box access or direct policy injection, AO-PA-MARL perturbs only the trajectory predictions used
in planning—making it suitable for both generative and rule-based predictors (Bautista-Montesano and Others,
2022). In contrast to trajectory generation models like Social-GAN (Gupta et al., 2018) or CoverNet (Phan-Minh
et al., 2020), which focus on behavioral realism, our approach explicitly targets vulnerabilities in safety-aware
control systems. Additionally, while robust RL methods aim to withstand observation-level disturbances (Tessler
et al., 2019; Wang et al., 2025), AO-PA-MARL exposes systemic weaknesses in prediction-dependent coordination
under adversarial inputs. To the best of our knowledge, AO-PA-MARL is the first framework to apply multi-agent
reinforcement learning for coordinated black-box perturbation of infrastructure-generated trajectory predictions. This
enables systematic robustness evaluation in prediction-driven CAV systems without assuming white-box access or
policy-level interference.
2. Preliminary
This section introduces the fundamental algorithms crucial for developing our approach.
2.1. Markov Games
Our algorithm builds upon a multi-agent extension of Markov decision processes (MDPs) known as partially
observable Markov games (Littman, 1994). A Markov game involving 𝑁agents is characterized by a set of states 
that represent all possible configurations of all agents, a set of actions 1, … , 𝑁and a set of observations 1, … , 𝑁
Xiaofeng Zhao: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 2 of 13
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=5348784
Preprint not peer reviewed

for each agent. Each agent 𝑖utilizes a stochastic policy 𝜋𝑖∶𝑖× 𝑖↦[0, 1] parameterized by 𝜃𝑖to select actions.
The next state is determined by the state transition function ∶× 1 × ⋯× 𝑁↦. At each time step 𝑡, Each
agent 𝑖receives a reward 𝑟𝑖,𝑡based on the state and its action and obtains an updated observation.
2.2. Decentralized MARL for CAV Coordination
Multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) has proven effective in optimizing traffic flow and reducing conges-
tion. Applied to CAV control, each vehicle is modeled as an independent agent that learns from interactions with
its environment—including other vehicles, pedestrians, and road conditions. Beyond individual safety and efficiency,
CAVs also learn to coordinate and communicate with others. A decentralized MARL algorithm is introduced in (Lowe
et al., 2017), where collaboration is enabled by a centralized critic that estimates the state-action value using global
observations and actions.
In our decentralized setting, each ego vehicle 𝜂𝑖observes only nearby agents within a 150 m longitudinal range,
denoted by its local neighborhood 𝑖, reflecting partial observability (Yu et al., 2020). Each agent perceives a local
state 𝑠𝑖and selects an action 𝑎𝑖= 𝜋𝑖(𝑠𝑖) from the feasible high-level action space 𝐴high, which includes discrete
maneuvers such as turn left, turn right, cruising, speed up, and slow down (Liu et al., 2022). The joint policy
is denoted as 𝜋= (𝜋1, … , 𝜋𝑁), and the joint action distribution factorizes as: 𝜋( ̄𝑎∣̄𝑠) = ∏𝑁
𝑖=1 𝜋𝑖(𝑎𝑖∣𝑠𝑖).
This work adopts a cooperative MARL setting where all agents are trained to optimize a shared objective—safely
navigating while maximizing traffic efficiency. The training objective is to maximize the cumulative expected return:
𝑈= 𝔼𝜋
[∑𝑇
𝑡=0 𝛾𝑡𝑟𝑡
]
, where the global reward is the average of individual rewards: 𝑟𝑡= 1
𝑁
∑𝑁
𝑖=1 𝑟𝑖,𝑡.
2.3. Cooperative MARL with Prediction-Based Safety Supervisor
Several recent works have addressed safety issues in MARL problems (Chen et al., 2023; Elsayed-Aly et al.,
2021). Our adversarial architecture builds upon the widely studied MARL with prediction-based safety supervisor,
which is designed to replace unsafe actions with safer alternatives (Chen et al., 2023). To enhance safety in connected
autonomous systems, a central communication station aggregates the joint state ̄𝑠and joint action ̄𝑎from all agents
via vehicle-to-infrastructure (V2I) communication. A prediction-based safety supervisor, denoted by , utilizes this
information to evaluate planned actions and intervene if they pose safety risks.
Specifically, based on estimated safety margins, the supervisor constructs a priority list 𝑃𝑡of autonomous vehicles to
address potential conflicts in a sequential manner. The evaluation proceeds over each vehicle 𝜂𝑖∈𝑃𝑡, starting from the
highest-priority vehicle. For each 𝜂𝑖, the supervisor simulates its proposed exploratory action and checks for potential
collisions with neighboring agents 𝑖. Let 𝑖∶= {𝑖} ∪𝑖denote the set of agents involved in this local evaluation,
and let 𝜁𝑖represent their joint predicted trajectories, including the predicted trajectories of neighboring agents and
those induced by each feasible action of 𝜂𝑖. Inside the safety supervisor, the trajectory induced by the proposed action of
𝜂𝑖, as generated by the MARL policy, is first evaluated in conjunction with the predicted trajectories of its neighboring
agents. If the proposed action leads to a potential collision within the prediction horizon 𝑇𝑛, the supervisor selects a
safer alternative from the set of feasible actions:
𝑎′
𝑡= arg max
𝑎𝑡∈𝐴high
(
min
𝑘∈𝑇𝑛
𝑑𝑘(𝑎𝑡; 𝜁𝑖)
)
,
(1)
where 𝑑𝑘(𝑎𝑡; 𝜁𝑖) denotes the minimum pairwise distance at timestep 𝑘between the ego vehicle and its neighboring
agents, based on the predicted trajectories assuming the ego vehicle adopts action 𝑎𝑡. Specifically, in this work, the
minimum inter-agent distance at timestep 𝑘is computed as:
𝑑𝑘(𝑎𝑡) ∶= min
𝑗∈𝑖
‖‖‖𝜁𝑘
𝑖(𝑎𝑡) −𝜁𝑘
𝑗
‖‖‖2 ,
where 𝜁𝑘
𝑖(𝑎𝑡) is the predicted trajectory of the ego vehicle at timestep 𝑘induced by action 𝑎𝑡, and 𝜁𝑘
𝑗is the predicted
trajectory of neighboring agent 𝑗∈𝑖. This evaluation and correction process is applied iteratively for all AVs in the
priority list 𝑃𝑡. At a high level, the supervisor leverages a trajectory prediction module (̄𝑠) = ̄𝜁to simulate future
motion outcomes, where ̄𝜁= (𝜁𝑖, … , 𝜁𝑁) is the collection of joint predicted trajectories. Based on these predictions,
the supervisor outputs a refined joint actions ̃𝑎= (̄𝑠, ̄𝑎, ̄𝜁) that ensures collective safety.
Xiaofeng Zhao: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 3 of 13
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=5348784
Preprint not peer reviewed

Figure 1: This architecture illustrates the high-level impact of PA-MARL, where predicted trajectories are perturbed by a
joint adversarial policy to mislead the safety supervisor into making unsafe decisions.
Algorithm 1 Safety Supervisor under PA-MARL
for 𝜂𝑖∈𝑃𝑡, starting from the highest-priority vehicle do
Identify its neighboring agents 𝑖
Predict joint trajectories 𝜁𝑖of neighboring agents and those induced by each feasible action of 𝜂𝑖
The corresponding PA-MARL adversarial agent 𝜈𝑖outputs perturbed trajectory predictions ̃𝜁𝑖∼𝜈𝑖(𝑠𝑖, 𝑎𝑖, 𝜁𝑖)
if ̃𝜁𝑖indicates potential collision then
Replace the risky action with 𝑎𝑡←𝑎′
𝑡according to Eq. (1)
end if
end for
3. Methodology
In this section, we begin by introducing the problem formulation and framework of prediction-adversarial multi-
agent reinforcement learning (PA-MARL), followed by a proof of the existence and uniqueness of the optimal
adversarial policy based on Bellman contraction. We then present the proposed algorithm—action-oriented prediction-
adversarial multi-agent reinforcement learning (AO-PA-MARL)—which is designed to circumvent the curse of
dimensionality and enable efficient learning. Interested readers are referred to the authors’ GitHub repository for
implementation details and visual demonstrations (Zhao).
3.1. Prediction-Adversarial Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning (PA-MARL): Problem
Formulation and Framework
To evaluate the robustness of prediction-based safety supervisors under realistic and adversarial conditions, we
propose a novel framework: prediction-adversarial multi-agent reinforcement learning (PA-MARL). While motivated
by cooperative V2I scenarios, the framework is broadly applicable to a wide range of CAV systems that rely
on prediction-driven coordination. As depicted in Fig. 1, our architecture preserves the core functionality of a
prediction-based safety supervisor, but introduces an adversarial agent that perturbs trajectory predictions within the
infrastructure-level communication station. These perturbations are designed to exploit vulnerabilities in the prediction
pipeline, rather than directly attacking agent observations or actions.
To formally model this interference, we introduce the prediction-adversarial Markov decision process (PA-MDP),
an extension of the classical MDP that explicitly accounts for adversarial influences in V2I-based cooperative systems.
At each time step, before the safety supervisor evaluates potential collisions for each vehicle 𝜂𝑖, the corresponding
adversary 𝜈𝑖observes the local state, action, and predicted trajectories of agents in 𝜂𝑖’s vicinity, denoted by (𝑠𝑖, 𝑎𝑖, 𝜁𝑖),
and outputs perturbed predictions ̃𝜁𝑖∼𝜈𝑖(𝑠𝑖, 𝑎𝑖, 𝜁𝑖). The unified network jointly predicts the perturbed trajectories
of both ego and surrounding agents, enabling more coherent multi-agent forecasting and improved adversarial
coordination and exploitation strategies, as supported by (Gupta et al., 2018; Phan-Minh et al., 2020; Zhao et al.,
2019). The safety supervisor then analyzes ̃𝜁to detect potential collisions and, if necessary, selects safer alternative
actions, as detailed in Algorithm 1.
From a high-level perspective, under the centralized training and decentralized execution (CTDE) framework,
the joint adversarial policy 𝜈= (𝜈1, … , 𝜈𝑁) is trained using the joint state, joint action, and the collection of
Xiaofeng Zhao: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 4 of 13
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=5348784
Preprint not peer reviewed

predicted trajectories for all agents, denoted by (̄𝑠, ̄𝑎, ̄𝜁). It outputs a set of perturbed predictions ̃𝜁∼𝜈(̄𝑠, ̄𝑎, ̄𝜁),
where ̃𝜁= ( ̃𝜁𝑈1, … , ̃𝜁𝑈𝑁) denotes the collection of perturbed local joint trajectory predictions for each agent 𝜂𝑖
and its neighbors 𝑁𝑖. The safety supervisor evaluates the joint action in conjunction with the joint state and the
collection of perturbed predicted trajectories, and computes a refined joint action ̃𝑎= (̄𝑠, ̄𝑎, ̃𝜁). The refined action ̃𝑎
is subsequently executed in place of the original joint action ̄𝑎to ensure adherence to safety constraints. To incentivize
effective disruption, the adversary receives a reward signal ̃𝑟= −𝑟, where 𝑟is the CAV global reward. Crucially, since
the perturbed predictions ̃𝜁may deviate from the ground truth, even subtle modifications can cause the supervisor to
select suboptimal actions, leading to degraded system performance and unsafe outcomes. To ensure the perturbations
remain realistic and physically plausible, we constrain the adversary’s output within a bounded set ( ̄𝜁), such that
̃𝜁∈( ̄𝜁). Formally, the PA-MDP is characterized by the 7-tuple (, , , , , , 𝛾):
• : the joint state space of the cooperative agents,
• : the joint action space,
• : the predicted trajectory space,
• : the set of feasible perturbations,
• : the environment transition dynamics,
• : the global cooperative reward function,
• 𝛾: the discount factor applied to future rewards.
In real-world scenarios, trajectory predictions are inherently uncertain due to factors such as stochastic disturbances,
limited sensing, and model inaccuracies. Our PA-MARL framework captures these uncertainties through worst-case
perturbations that remain physically plausible. By targeting the prediction module instead of direct agent interactions,
the adversary can indirectly influence the behavior of multiple vehicles simultaneously. This enables large-scale
disruptions in coordinated environments such as connected autonomous traffic, and highlights critical vulnerabilities
in prediction-dependent safety systems. The PA-MARL framework thus offers a principled and practical foundation
for assessing the security of V2I-integrated autonomy.
3.2. Optimal Adversary Policy via Bellman Contraction
Given the PA-MDP formulation, we aim to evaluate the worst-case impact of adversarial perturbations on
cooperative decision-making in connected autonomous systems. The objective is to approximate the optimal joint
adversarial policy 𝜈∗= (𝜈∗
1, … , 𝜈∗
𝑁) through iterative value-based optimization conducted during centralized training,
aiming to minimize the expected cumulative reward of the CAV. Accordingly, we define the adversarial value function
within the PA-MDP as:
̃𝑉𝜋◦𝜈(̄𝑠, ̄𝑎, ̄𝜁) = 𝔼𝜋◦𝜈
[ ∞
∑
𝑘=0
𝛾𝑘𝑟𝑡+𝑘+1 ∣̄𝑠𝑡= ̄𝑠, ̄𝑎𝑡= ̄𝑎, ̄𝜁𝑡= ̄𝜁
]
where 𝑟𝑡denotes the cooperative reward at time step t and 𝜋◦𝜈represents the cooperative policy operating under
adversarially perturbed trajectory predictions. This formulation captures how an adversary can indirectly influence
agent behavior by manipulating the input provided by the trajectory prediction module. Given a fixed joint CAV
policy 𝜋, along with the infrastructure-level modules—trajectory predictor and safety supervisor —the worst-case
performance is described by the optimal adversarial value function:
̃𝑉𝜋◦𝜈∗(̄𝑠, ̄𝑎, ̄𝜁) = min
𝜈
̃𝑉𝜋◦𝜈(̄𝑠, ̄𝑎, ̄𝜁)
To solve for 𝜈∗, we establish a Bellman contraction property for the adversarial value function.
Theorem 1 (Bellman contraction for optimal adversary). Define Bellman operator ∶ℝ××→ℝ××,
(̃𝑉)(̄𝑠, ̄𝑎, ̄𝜁) =
min
̄𝜁′∈( ̄̄𝜁)
∑
̄𝑠′
𝑝(̄𝑠′ ∣̄𝑠, ̄𝑎, ̄𝜁)
∑
̄𝑎′
𝜋( ̄𝑎′ ∣̄𝑠′)
∑
̄𝜁′
( ̄𝜁′ ∣̄𝑎′, ̄𝑠′) [𝑅+ 𝛾̃𝑉(̄𝑠′, ̄𝑎′, ̄𝜁′)]
Xiaofeng Zhao: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 5 of 13
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=5348784
Preprint not peer reviewed

where the reward function is defined as 𝑅∶= 𝔼[𝑟∣̄𝑠, ̄𝑎, ̄𝜁, ̃𝜁, ̄𝑠′, ̄𝑎′, ̄𝜁′]. The Bellman equation for optimal adversary 𝜈∗
satisfies the fixed-point equation: ̃𝑉𝜋◦𝜈∗= ̃𝑉𝜋◦𝜈∗, where is a contraction mapping.
Proof. By the definition of 𝑉𝜋◦𝜈(̄𝑠, ̄𝑎, ̄𝜁),
̃𝑉𝜋◦𝜈∗(̄𝑠, ̄𝑎, ̄𝜁)
= min
𝜈𝔼𝜋◦𝜈
[ ∞
∑
𝑘=0
𝛾𝑘𝑟𝑡+𝑘+1|||̄𝑠𝑡= ̄𝑠, ̄𝑎𝑡= ̄𝑎, ̄𝜁𝑡= ̄𝜁
]
= min
𝜈𝔼𝜋◦𝜈
[
𝑟𝑡+1 + 𝛾
∞
∑
𝑘=0
𝛾𝑘𝑟𝑡+𝑘+2|||̄𝑠𝑡= ̄𝑠, ̄𝑎𝑡= ̄𝑎, ̄𝜁𝑡= ̄𝜁
]
= min
𝜈
∑
̄𝑠′
𝑝(̄𝑠′|̄𝑠, ̃𝑎)
∑
̄𝑎′
𝜋( ̄𝑎′|̄𝑠′)
∑
̄𝜁′
( ̄𝜁′| ̄𝑎′, ̄𝑠′)
[
𝑟𝑡+1 + 𝛾𝔼𝜋◦𝜈
[ ∞
∑
𝑘=0
𝛾𝑘𝑟𝑡+𝑘+2||| ̄𝑆𝑡+1 = ̄𝑠′, ̄𝑎𝑡+1 = ̄𝑎′, ̄𝜁𝑡+1 = ̄𝜁′
]]
= min
̃𝜁∈( ̄𝜁)
∑
̄𝑠′
𝑝(̄𝑠′|̄𝑠, (̄𝑠, ̄𝑎, ̃𝜁))
∑
̄𝑎′
𝜋( ̄𝑎′|̄𝑠′)
∑
̄𝜁′
( ̄𝜁′| ̄𝑎′, ̄𝑠′) [𝑟𝑡+1 + 𝛾̃𝑉𝜋◦𝜈∗(̄𝑠′, ̄𝑎′, ̄𝜁′)]
= min
̃𝜁∈( ̄𝜁)
∑
̄𝑠′
𝑝′(̄𝑠′|̄𝑠, ̄𝑎, ̃𝜁)
∑
̄𝑎′
𝜋( ̄𝑎′|̄𝑠′)
∑
̄𝜁′
( ̄𝜁′| ̄𝑎′, ̄𝑠′) [𝑟𝑡+1 + 𝛾̃𝑉𝜋◦𝜈∗(̄𝑠′, ̄𝑎′, ̄𝜁′)]
where 𝑝′(̄𝑠′ ∣̄𝑠, ̄𝑎, ̃𝜁) denotes 𝑝(̄𝑠′ ∣̄𝑠, (̄𝑠, ̄𝑎, ̃𝜁)). This is the Bellman equation for the optimal adversary 𝜈∗; 𝜈∗is a fixed
point of the Bellman operator . Next, we show that is a contraction mapping, ensuring the existence of a unique
fixed point. Without loss of generality, assume ̃𝑉𝜋◦𝜈1(̄𝑠, ̄𝑎, ̄𝜁) ≥̃𝑉𝜋◦𝜈2(̄𝑠, ̄𝑎, ̄𝜁). Then
̃𝑉𝜋𝜋◦𝜈1(̄𝑠, ̄𝑎, ̄𝜁) −̃𝑉𝜋𝜋◦𝜈2(̄𝑠, ̄𝑎, ̄𝜁)
≤max
̃𝜁∈( ̄𝜁)
⎧
⎪
⎨
⎪⎩
∑
̄𝑠′
𝑝′(̄𝑠′ ∣̄𝑠, ̄𝑎, ̃𝜁)
∑
̄𝑎′
𝜋( ̄𝑎′ ∣̄𝑠′)
∑
̄𝜁′
( ̄𝜁′ ∣̄𝑎′, ̄𝑠′)
[
𝑅+ 𝛾̃𝑉𝜋𝜋◦𝜈1(̄𝑠′, ̄𝑎′, ̄𝜁′)
]
−
∑
̄𝑠′
𝑝′(̄𝑠′ ∣̄𝑠, ̄𝑎, ̃𝜁)
∑
̄𝑎′
𝜋( ̄𝑎′ ∣̄𝑠′)
∑
̄𝜁′
( ̄𝜁′ ∣̄𝑎′, ̄𝑠′)
[
𝑅+ 𝛾̃𝑉𝜋𝜋◦𝜈2(̄𝑠′, ̄𝑎′, ̄𝜁′)
]⎫
⎪
⎬
⎪⎭
= 𝛾max
̃𝜁∈( ̄𝜁)
∑
̄𝑠′
𝑝′(̄𝑠′ ∣̄𝑠, ̄𝑎, ̃𝜁)
∑
̄𝑎′
𝜋( ̄𝑎′ ∣̄𝑠′)
∑
̄𝜁′
( ̄𝜁′ ∣̄𝑎′, ̄𝑠′)
[
̃𝑉𝜋𝜋◦𝜈1(̄𝑠′, ̄𝑎′, ̄𝜁′) −̃𝑉𝜋𝜋◦𝜈2(̄𝑠′, ̄𝑎′, ̄𝜁′)
]
≤𝛾max
̃𝜁∈( ̄𝜁)
∑
̄𝑠′
𝑝′(̄𝑠′ ∣̄𝑠, ̄𝑎, ̃𝜁)
∑
̄𝑎′
𝜋( ̄𝑎′ ∣̄𝑠′)
∑
̄𝜁′
( ̄𝜁′ ∣̄𝑎′, ̄𝑠′) ‖‖‖ ̃𝑉𝜋𝜋◦𝜈1 −̃𝑉𝜋𝜋◦𝜈2
‖‖‖∞
= 𝛾‖‖‖ ̃𝑉𝜋𝜋◦𝜈1 −̃𝑉𝜋𝜋◦𝜈2
‖‖‖∞
The first inequality follows from
min
𝑥1 𝑓(𝑥1) −min
𝑥2 𝑔(𝑥2) ≤max
𝑥(𝑓(𝑥) −𝑔(𝑥)),
and the second follows from pointwise bounding. Similarly, if ̃𝑉2(̄𝑠, ̄𝑎, ̄𝜁) > ̃𝑉1(̄𝑠, ̄𝑎, ̄𝜁), the same argument applies.
Thus,
‖̃𝑉1 −̃𝑉2‖∞≤𝛾‖ ̃𝑉1 −̃𝑉2‖∞,
proving that is a 𝛾-contraction. Since 0 < 𝛾< 1, by the Banach fixed-point theorem, there exists a unique fixed point
̃𝑉𝜋◦𝜈∗.
Thus, under a fixed cooperative policy 𝜋, trajectory predictor , and safety supervisor , the optimal joint
adversarial policy 𝜈∗can be computed by iteratively applying the Bellman operator until convergence during
Xiaofeng Zhao: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 6 of 13
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=5348784
Preprint not peer reviewed

Algorithm 2 Safety Supervisor under AO-PA-MARL
for 𝜂𝑖∈𝑃𝑡, starting from the highest-priority vehicle do
Identify its neighboring agents 𝑖
Predict joint trajectories 𝜁𝑖of neighboring agents and those induced by each feasible action of 𝜂𝑖.
The corresponding AO-PA-MARL adversarial agent 𝜈𝑖outputs action pairs ( ̂𝑎, ̆𝑎) ∼𝜈𝑖(𝑠𝑖, 𝑎𝑖, 𝜁𝑖)
Compute the optimal perturbed trajectory ̃𝜁𝑖according to Eq. (2)
if ̃𝜁𝑖indicates potential collision then
Replace the risky action with 𝑎𝑡←𝑎′
𝑡according to Eq. (1)
end if
end for
centralized training. This contraction-based formulation guarantees the existence and uniqueness of the corresponding
adversarial value function ̃𝑉𝜋◦𝜈∗, and provides theoretical justification for the PA-MARL framework in systematically
evaluating worst-case adversarial influences on cooperative autonomous decision-making.
3.3. Action-Oriented Prediction-Adversarial Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning
Continuous-action reinforcement learning, particularly in multi-agent contexts, faces fundamental scalability chal-
lenges in high-dimensional action spaces. These limitations become especially pronounced in continuous-action PA-
MARL, where the adversarial agent is tasked with generating perturbed trajectory predictions for multiple surrounding
objects. In such cases, the action space is defined over a product of dimensions: the number of agents × prediction
horizon × state features (e.g., 2D position and heading angle). Consequently, even modest increases in object count or
prediction horizon lead to a combinatorial explosion in the dimensionality of the continuous action space. Standard
algorithms—such as DDPG, TD3, and MADDPG—struggle under these conditions due to unstable gradient estimates,
inaccurate Q-function approximation, and poor sample efficiency in high-dimensional domains (Fujimoto et al., 2018;
Lillicrap et al., 2016). These challenges are further amplified in multi-agent settings, where simultaneous policy updates
introduce non-stationarity that complicates value learning (Lowe et al., 2017). As a result, such methods often fail to
converge or produce brittle policies in realistic multi-agent environments involving trajectory prediction.
A natural approach to mitigating these challenges is to discretize the trajectory space, as discrete-action PA-MARL.
However, in adversarial trajectory prediction, naively discretizing the full future trajectory across all agents, time
steps, and state dimensions quickly becomes intractable. The size of the discrete action space scales as the number of
values per dimension, raised to the power of the product of the number of dimensions, the prediction horizon, and the
number of agents. The exponentially growing action space gives rise to the curse of dimensionality, a well-documented
challenge in motion planning and trajectory optimization, where even coarse discretizations become computationally
prohibitive and impractical—particularly in long-horizon or multi-agent settings (Chen et al., 2021; Erez and Todorov,
2012; Li et al., 2023). Beyond computational concerns, discretization also reduces representational fidelity, failing to
capture fine-grained perturbations that may lead to significant safety violations when propagated through downstream
modules (Zeng et al., 2021).
To overcome these limitations, we introduce the action-oriented prediction-adversarial multi-Agent reinforcement
learning (AO-PA-MARL) framework, which balances scalability with adversarial precision. Instead of modifying the
full continuous trajectory space—which is computationally intractable and prone to training instability—our method
restricts the adversary’s search to a finite and structured set of discrete action candidates for each vehicle 𝜂𝑖. These
candidates capture a small number of semantically meaningful future behaviors, enabling the adversary to efficiently
influence the supervisor’s decisions while preserving tractability in the learning process. Within this structured action
space, and given its local observation tuple (𝑠𝑖, 𝑎𝑖, 𝜁𝑖), each adversarial agent 𝜈𝑖generates a distribution over action
pairs ( ̂𝑎, ̆𝑎) ∼𝜈𝑖(𝑠𝑖, 𝑎𝑖, 𝜁𝑖), where ̂𝑎∈high denotes a targeted risky action intended to increase the likelihood
of safety violations, and ̆𝑎⊆high represents a set of reference safe actions that are likely to be selected by the
supervisor under nominal (non-adversarial) conditions. The policy is structured to support variable action outputs,
allowing the policy to determine whether to output only ̂𝑎, only ̆𝑎, or both as part of its adversarial strategy. An action-
oriented trajectory optimization procedure is then used to construct a perturbed joint trajectory prediction ̃𝜁𝑖that
maximizes the adversary’s influence. The goal is to increase the inter-agent distance associated with the risky action ̂𝑎,
while simultaneously reducing the distances associated with the safe alternatives in ̆𝑎. Formally, the optimal perturbed
Xiaofeng Zhao: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 7 of 13
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=5348784
Preprint not peer reviewed

trajectory ̃𝜁𝑖∈(𝜁𝑖) is obtained by solving:
̃𝜁𝑖= arg
max
𝜁∈(𝜁𝑖)
(
𝑑( ̂𝑎; 𝜁) −1
𝑀
∑
𝑎∈̆𝑎
𝑑(𝑎; 𝜁)
)
,
(2)
where the scalar 𝑀denotes the number of actions in the reference set ̆𝑎, and 𝑑(𝑎; 𝜁) denotes the minimum inter-agent
distance between the ego vehicle and its neighboring agents over the prediction horizon 𝑇𝑛, computed based on the
perturbed predicted trajectories 𝜁assuming the ego vehicle adopts action 𝑎. Specifically,
𝑑(𝑎; 𝜁) ∶= min
𝑘∈𝑇𝑛
min
𝑗∈𝑖
‖‖‖𝜁𝑘
𝑖(𝑎) −𝜁𝑘
𝑗
‖‖‖2 ,
where 𝜁𝑘
𝑖(𝑎) denotes the perturbed predicted trajectory of the ego vehicle at timestep 𝑘under action 𝑎and 𝜁𝑘
𝑗is the
perturbed predicted trajectory of neighboring agent 𝑗∈𝑖at timestep 𝑘. The details of the proposed AO-PA-MARL
algorithm and its interaction with the safety supervisor are provided in Algorithm 2.
This adversarial action selection mechanism, augmented by trajectory optimization, enables each adversarial agent
𝜈𝑖to learn which risky actions ̂𝑎are most likely to be accepted by the safety supervisor when the perceived ordering
of safety margins is manipulated. Crucially, the adversary dynamically adapts its strategy based on the behavioral
tendencies of the CAV policy coupled with the prediction-based safety supervisor. When the cooperative MARL policy
already proposes the risky action ̂𝑎, the adversary reinforces this decision by maximizing its associated safety margin,
thereby suppressing the likelihood of supervisory intervention. In this case, the optimization simplifies to:
̃𝜁𝑖= arg
max
𝜁∈(𝜁𝑖) 𝑑( ̂𝑎; 𝜁).
Conversely, if a correction by the safety supervisor is expected—or if the adversary aims to induce a deviation from
the CAV policy’s preferred action—it strategically biases the safety evaluation by inflating the margin of risky action
̂𝑎while reducing those of the safer alternatives.
Multi-agent reinforcement learning in the AO-PA-MARL framework plays a critical role in enabling adversaries to
exploit vulnerabilities in the supervisor’s decision-making process. Through interactions, the adversary learns not only
which risky action is most likely to be accepted, but also how to construct sequences of trajectory perturbations across
time that gradually distort the supervisor’s perception of safety over time. Even when a perturbed action ̂𝑎is objectively
unsafe, carefully crafted perturbations can manipulate margin rankings and mislead the supervisor into permitting
unsafe behavior. Importantly, ̂𝑎does not need to cause an immediate collision; rather, a sequence of such marginally
risky actions can accumulate and ultimately result in critical safety violations. To support efficient learning, the AO-PA-
MARL framework reduces the effective dimensionality of the adversarial action space by constraining perturbations to
a discrete set of strategically selected high-level actions. This design preserves the expressiveness needed to generate
impactful trajectory manipulations while significantly reducing the complexity of adversarial optimization in multi-
agent environments.
4. Experiment
In this section, we first present the case study setup. We then evaluate the performance of the proposed AO-PA-
MARL algorithm in two simulation environments—crowd navigation and highway on-ramp merging—followed by a
comparative analysis against baseline algorithms. The results aim to address the following key questions:
1. Can the proposed AO-PA-MARL algorithm, designed to circumvent the curse of dimensionality, efficiently learn
in complex simulation environments?
2. Does AO-PA-MARL generate perturbed trajectories that result in higher collision rates compared to baseline
algorithms?
4.1. Case Study Setup
The proposed algorithm, action-oriented prediction-adversarial multi-agent reinforcement learning (AO-PA-
MARL), is built upon the multi-agent proximal policy optimization (MAPPO) framework (Yu et al., 2021), which
extends proximal policy optimization (PPO) to multi-agent settings via centralized critics and decentralized recurrent
Xiaofeng Zhao: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 8 of 13
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=5348784
Preprint not peer reviewed

(a) Crowd navigation: the robot (top-left green box) incorrectly forecasts a human as yielding, leading to a collision.
(b) Highway on-ramp merging: perturbed trajectories of two cyclists jointly contribute to a vehicle collision.
Figure 2: Impact of perturbed predicted trajectories generated by the AO-PA-MARL policy. Purple denotes the ground-truth
prediction of the ego agent; blue represents the ground-truth predictions of humans, and red represents their perturbed
predictions. Where red and blue overlap, only red is shown. For visual clarity, perturbed trajectories corresponding to all
feasible actions of the ego agent are not shown.
(RNN-based) actors. To support variable action outputs, each action dimension in the high-level action space high
is augmented with an additional “no-action” option, enabling the policy to selectively omit certain actions based
on context. The baseline method, continuous-action PA-MARL, is implemented using MAPPO and multi-agent soft
actor-critic (MASAC), resulting in the PA-MAPPO and PA-MASAC variants, respectively (Pu et al., 2021). Discrete-
action PA-MARL is not considered due to the prohibitive computational cost of applying standard policy optimization
methods to extremely large discrete action spaces.
We evaluate AO-PA-MARL against these baselines in two simulated environments to test generalizability across
domains: crowd navigation and highway on-ramp merging. Both scenarios reflect non-compliant settings, where
human agents act independently and do not respond to the behavior of autonomous vehicles. To ensure physical
plausibility while maintaining adversarial effectiveness, all perturbed trajectories are constrained within predefined
bounds. Specifically, in the crowd navigation environment, perturbations are limited to ±0.2 m in both the 𝑥and
𝑦directions relative to the ground-truth predictions. In the highway merging scenario, perturbations are bounded
within ±0.4 m in the 𝑥and 𝑦directions and within ±0.2 rad in orientation. These constraints ensure that adversarial
modifications remain physically realistic while still presenting meaningful challenges to the learned policies. The
perturbation magnitudes used in this work are consistent with the range of empirical trajectory prediction errors
observed in real-world autonomous driving benchmarks (Caesar et al., 2020; Chai et al., 2019; Zhan et al., 2019), where
leading forecasting models frequently report displacement errors exceeding 0.3–0.5 m at short prediction horizons. In
addition, adversarial attacks are applied to both learned trajectory generation models and rule-based predictors to
demonstrate the generalizability of the proposed method across different prediction paradigms.
In the crowd navigation environment, three autonomous vehicles operate in the presence of three human
pedestrians, whose motions are simulated using the ORCA algorithm (van den Berg et al., 2011). Safe navigation
in this context requires agents to reason about and adapt to the anticipated future trajectories of nearby humans. To this
end, we implement a stochastic physics-based trajectory prediction model, formulated as a second-order linear motion
model with additive Gaussian process noise, to simulate pedestrian motion with uncertainty and serve as the ground
truth generator against which adversarial perturbations are evaluated. Vehicles are modeled as circles of 0.3 meters in
diameter, and humans as 0.4-meter circles.
In the highway on-ramp merging environment, implemented using the OpenAI Gym framework (Leurent, 2018),
three connected autonomous vehicles (CAVs) are tasked with merging from a ramp onto a main highway while
Xiaofeng Zhao: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 9 of 13
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=5348784
Preprint not peer reviewed

(a) Training performance in crowd navigation
(b) Training performance in highway on-ramp merging
Figure 3: Training curves comparing AO-PA-MARL, PA-MAPPO, and PA-MASAC across two environments
interacting with three nearby cyclists. Successful merging requires agents to anticipate and plan around the future
motions of surrounding vehicles. For CAVs, high-level control decisions—such as accelerate, decelerate, and change
lane—are processed through the MOBIL lane change model to generate feasible maneuver sequences, which are then
propagated using the kinematic bicycle model as predicted trajectory (Kesting et al.). Cyclist motion is predicted using
a neural network trained via maximum likelihood estimation (MLE), with ground-truth trajectories generated from a
second-order linear motion model incorporating additive Gaussian process noise to capture moderate maneuverability
and uncertainty. CAVs are modeled as rectangles with dimensions 4 meters by 2 meters, and cyclists as rectangles with
dimensions 1.8 meters by 0.8 meter.
4.2. Crowd Navigation Environment
In the crowd navigation environment, the AO-PA-MARL policy generates a sequence of perturbed trajectories
across time, as illustrated in Fig. 2a. At time step T0, the adversarial perturbation modifies the predicted human
motion to appear as if yielding, effectively deactivating the safety supervisor by making the current action seem
safe. Consequently, the robot continues along its planned trajectory without intervention. By T1, as the robot and
human draw closer, the supervisor begins to recognize the risk of collision. However, due to limited reaction time
and spatial constraints, it is too late to initiate a safe corrective maneuver, and a collision occurs at T2. Although the
perturbations are spatially bounded, they are sufficient to alter the perceived safety margin. The failure to intervene
demonstrates the vulnerability of safety-aware systems to adversarial trajectory manipulation, especially in densely
interactive environments.
4.3. Highway On-Ramp Merging Environment
In the highway on-ramp merging environment, the AO-PA-MARL policy generates perturbed trajectory predictions
for two cyclists that strategically manipulate the robot’s perception of safety, as illustrated in Fig. 2b. At time step
T0, the perturbed prediction of the cyclist above the ego vehicle indicates an imminent turn toward the vehicle’s path,
creating a perceived threat. In response, the safety supervisor overrides the current action with a lane-change maneuver
that appears safer under the manipulated forecast. Simultaneously, the perturbed trajectory of the cyclist to the right
suggests that it is backing away from the ego vehicle, thereby suppressing the supervisor’s inclination to initiate a
subsequent avoidance maneuver. This misrepresentation delays further intervention until T1. However, by that time,
the supervisor lacks sufficient time or space to execute a safe correction, resulting in a collision at T2. This example
highlights how jointly predicted perturbed trajectories can form a coherent and coordinated adversarial strategy that
effectively deceives safety-aware decision-making systems.
4.4. Comparison with Baseline Algorithms
This section presents empirical evidence demonstrating the effectiveness of AO-PA-MARL in learning impactful
adversarial strategies. As shown in Fig. 3, AO-PA-MARL consistently outperforms the baseline algorithms, PA-
MAPPO and PA-MASAC, across both evaluation environments. In the crowd navigation setting, AO-PA-MARL
achieves substantially higher evaluation rewards throughout training, exhibiting a steady upward trend and converging
Xiaofeng Zhao: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 10 of 13
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=5348784
Preprint not peer reviewed

(a) Collision rate comparison in crowd navigation
(b) Collision rate comparison in highway on-ramp merging
Figure 4: Evaluation of collision rates for AO-PA-MARL, PA-MAPPO, and PA-MASAC across two environments
to a markedly improved final performance. In the highway on-ramp merging scenario, it demonstrates faster con-
vergence and improved training stability, quickly surpassing the baselines and maintaining a significant performance
margin. These results indicate that AO-PA-MARL not only achieves better performance but also learns more efficiently,
reaching high-reward policies in fewer training epochs.
While the learning curves indicate that AO-PA-MARL effectively degrades the CAV reward—comprising lane-
following, collision avoidance, and speed objectives—Fig. 4 further demonstrates that AO-PA-MARL consistently
induces significantly higher collision rates than both PA-MAPPO and PA-MASAC across different environments. In
crowd navigation, AO-PA-MARL results in an order-of-magnitude increase in collision rate compared to the baselines,
while in the highway merging case, it achieves a smaller yet still substantial increase. This differential advantage
suggests that AO-PA-MARL is particularly effective in densely interactive environments such as crowd navigation.
These results highlight the algorithm’s ability to generate strategically crafted trajectory perturbations that exploit
vulnerabilities in cooperative policies. The consistently strong performance across diverse scenarios highlights the
robustness of AO-PA-MARL, which employs action-oriented optimization to efficiently learn high-impact adversarial
strategies in high-dimensional multi-agent environments, thereby demonstrating the effectiveness of action-based
attacks.
5. Conclusion
This paper addresses a critical security vulnerability in connected and automated vehicle (CAV) systems—specifically,
the susceptibility of infrastructure-based trajectory prediction modules to adversarial attacks. Unlike prior approaches
that target individual vehicles or assume unrealistic levels of adversary access, we propose a scalable framework for
evaluating and executing prediction-level adversarial attacks through coordinated multi-agent reinforcement learning
(MARL). To this end, we introduce the action-oriented prediction-adversarial MARL (AO-PA-MARL) framework,
which demonstrates the feasibility of generating trajectory perturbations under realistic physical constraints. By
leveraging action-oriented trajectory optimization within a centralized training and decentralized execution (CTDE)
paradigm, AO-PA-MARL mitigates the curse of dimensionality in high-dimensional continuous spaces, enabling
efficient adversarial policy learning. Empirical results in simulated crowd navigation and highway merging scenarios
show that AO-PA-MARL significantly increases collision rates compared to baseline methods. A limitation of
the current architecture lies in potential inconsistencies when multiple adversarial agents generate perturbations
for the same target. Developing a consistent perturbation generation scheme—possibly through a priority-based or
consensus-driven mechanism—represents an important direction for future research. Overall, the results demonstrate
the scalability and effectiveness of AO-PA-MARL as an adversarial evaluation tool for assessing the robustness of
trajectory planning models under realistic uncertainties in CAV systems.
Xiaofeng Zhao: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 11 of 13
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=5348784
Preprint not peer reviewed

References
Bautista-Montesano, R., Others, 2022. Autonomous navigation at unsignalized intersections: A coupled reinforcement learning and model predictive
control approach. Transportation Research Part C: Emerging Technologies 150, 103850. doi:10.1016/j.trc.2022.103850.
van den Berg, J., Guy, S.J., Lin, M., Manocha, D., 2011. Reciprocal n-body collision avoidance, in: Pradalier, C., Siegwart, R., Hirzinger, G. (Eds.),
Robotics Research, Springer Berlin Heidelberg.
Caesar, H., Bankiti, V., Lang, A., Vora, S., Liong, V.E., Xu, Q., Krishnan, A., Pan, Y., Baldan, G., Beijbom, O., 2020. nuscenes: A multimodal
dataset for autonomous driving, in: CVPR, pp. 11621–11631.
Cao, Y., Xiao, C., Anandkumar, A., Xu, D., Pavone, M., 2022. Advdo: Realistic adversarial attacks for trajectory prediction, in: Computer Vision
– ECCV 2022: 17th European Conference, Tel Aviv, Israel, October 23–27, 2022, Proceedings, Part V, Springer-Verlag.
Chai, Y., Sapp, B., Bansal, M., Anguelov, D., 2019. Multipath: Multiple probabilistic anchor trajectory hypotheses, in: CVPR, pp. 13620–13629.
Chen, D., Hajidavalloo, M.R., Li, Z., Chen, K., Wang, Y., Jiang, L., Wang, Y., 2023. Deep multi-agent reinforcement learning for highway on-ramp
merging in mixed traffic. IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems 24, 11623–11638.
Chen, H., Wu, F., Hou, K., Qiu, T.Z., 2024a. Leveraging dynamic right-of-way allocation and tolling policy for cav dedicated lane management to
promote cav and improve mobility. IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems 25, 6667–6676.
Chen, J., Li, J., Fan, C., Williams, B.C., 2021. Scalable and safe multi-agent motion planning with nonlinear dynamics and bounded disturbances,
in: Proceedings of the Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI 2021).
Chen, X., Bhadani, R., Sun, Z., Head, L., 2024b. Msma: Multi-agent trajectory prediction in connected and autonomous vehicle environment with
multi-source data integration. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.21310 .
Chen, X., Zhang, H., Deng, F., Liang, J., Yang, J., 2024c. Stochastic non-autoregressive transformer-based multi-modal pedestrian trajectory
prediction for intelligent vehicles. IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems 25, 3561–3574.
Comert, G., Rahman, M., Islam, M., Chowdhury, M., 2022.
Change point models for real-time cyber attack detection in connected vehicle
environment. IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems 23, 12328–12342. doi:10.1109/TITS.2021.3113675.
Cui, Z., Ke, R., Pu, Z., Wang, Y., 2020. Deep bidirectional and unidirectional lstm recurrent neural network for network-wide traffic speed prediction.
IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems 21, 193–204. doi:10.1109/TITS.2019.2893439.
Elsayed-Aly, I., Bharadwaj, S., Amato, C., Ehlers, R., Topcu, U., Feng, L., 2021. Safe multi-agent reinforcement learning via shielding. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2101.11196 .
Erez, T., Todorov, E., 2012. Trajectory optimization for domains with contacts using inverse dynamics, in: 2012 IEEE/RSJ International Conference
on Intelligent Robots and Systems.
Fujimoto, S., van Hoof, H., Meger, D., 2018. Addressing function approximation error in actor-critic methods, in: International Conference on
Machine Learning.
Guo, J., He, Z., Wang, H., Wang, J., Li, K., 2025. Vehicle trajectory prediction by integrating data-driven and knowledge-guided technique. IEEE
Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems 26, 5888–5898. doi:10.1109/TITS.2025.3549744.
Gupta, A., Johnson, J., Fei-Fei, L., Savarese, S., Alahi, A., 2018. Social gan: Socially acceptable trajectories with generative adversarial networks,
in: IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR).
Han, L., Zhang, L., 2025. Improved multi-agent deep reinforcement learning-based integrated control for mixed traffic flow in a freeway corridor
with multiple bottlenecks. Transportation Research Part C: Emerging Technologies 174, 105077. doi:10.1016/j.trc.2025.105077.
Hu, H., Wang, Q., Cheng, M., Gao, Z., 2023. Trajectory prediction neural network and model interpretation based on temporal pattern attention.
IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems 24, 2746–2759.
Huang, O., Rao, H., Cai, X., Wang, T., Sun, A., Xing, S., Sun, Y., Jia, G., 2025. Spatial temporal attention based target vehicle trajectory prediction
for internet of vehicles. arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.00890 .
Jiang, X., Shang, Q., 2023. A dynamic cav-dedicated lane allocation method with the joint optimization of signal timing parameters and smooth
trajectory in a mixed traffic environment. IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems 24, 6436–6449. doi:10.1109/TITS.2022.
3172942.
Kesting, A., Treiber, M., Helbing, D., . General lane-changing model MOBIL for car-following models. Transportation Research Record 1999.
Khattak, W., Nair, P.P., Comert, G., Wang, Y., Hou, J., et al., 2020. Modeling and analyzing cyberattack effects on connected automated vehicular
platoons. Transportation Research Part C: Emerging Technologies 114, 512–536. doi:10.1016/j.trc.2020.01.011.
Khattak, Z.H., Smith, B.L., Fontaine, M.D., 2021. Impact of cyberattacks on safety and stability of connected and automated vehicle platoons under
lane changes. Accident Analysis Prevention 150, 105861. doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aap.2020.105861.
Leurent, E., 2018. An environment for autonomous driving decision-making. https://github.com/eleurent/highway-env. Accessed:
2025-05-09.
Li, J., Ma, H., Tomizuka, M., 2019. Conditional generative neural system for probabilistic trajectory prediction, in: 2019 IEEE/RSJ International
Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS), IEEE. pp. 6150–6156.
Li, J., Yang, F., Tomizuka, M., Choi, C., 2020. Evolvegraph: Multi-agent trajectory prediction with dynamic relational reasoning, in: 2020 Advances
in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS).
Li, Y., Ju, P., Shroff, N., 2023. Achieving sample and computational efficient reinforcement learning by action space reduction via grouping. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2306.12981 .
Li, Z., Zhou, Y., Zhang, Y., Others, 2024.
Enhancing vehicular platoon stability in the presence of communication cyberattacks: A reliable
longitudinal cooperative control strategy. Transportation Research Part C: Emerging Technologies 158, 104449. doi:10.1016/j.trc.2024.
104449.
Lillicrap, T.P., Hunt, J.J., Pritzel, A., Heess, N., Erez, T., Tassa, Y., Silver, D., Wierstra, D., 2016. Continuous control with deep reinforcement
learning, in: 4th International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2016, San Juan, Puerto Rico, May 2-4, 2016, Conference Track
Proceedings.
Xiaofeng Zhao: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 12 of 13
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=5348784
Preprint not peer reviewed

Littman, M.L., 1994. Markov games as a framework for multi-agent reinforcement learning, in: Cohen, W.W., Hirsh, H. (Eds.), Machine Learning
Proceedings 1994. Morgan Kaufmann, pp. 157–163.
Liu, Q., Dang, F., Wang, X., Ren, X., 2022. Autonomous highway merging in mixed traffic using reinforcement learning and motion predictive
safety controller, IEEE Press. p. 1063–1069. doi:10.1109/ITSC55140.2022.9921741.
Lowe, R., Wu, Y., Tamar, A., Harb, J., Abbeel, P., Mordatch, I., 2017. Multi-agent actor-critic for mixed cooperative-competitive environments, in:
Guyon, I., von Luxburg, U., Bengio, S., Wallach, H.M., Fergus, R., Vishwanathan, S.V.N., Garnett, R. (Eds.), Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems 30: Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems 2017, December 4-9, 2017, Long Beach, CA, USA, pp.
6379–6390.
Ma, Y., Zhu, X., Wang, S., Yang, R., Manocha, D., 2020. Trafficpredict: Trajectory prediction for heterogeneous traffic-agents. IEEE Transactions
on Intelligent Transportation Systems 21, 4640–4654. doi:10.1109/TITS.2019.2953981.
Phan-Minh, T., Grigore, E.C., Boulton, F.A., Beijbom, O., Wolff, E.M., 2020. Covernet: Multimodal behavior prediction using trajectory sets, in:
2020 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR).
Pu, Y., Wang, S., Yang, R., Yao, X., Li, B., 2021. Decomposed soft actor-critic method for cooperative multi-agent reinforcement learning. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2104.06655 .
Rathore, R.S., Hewage, C., Kaiwartya, O., Lloret, J., 2022. In-vehicle communication cyber security: Challenges and solutions. Sensors 22.
Shi, H., Zhou, Y., Wu, K., Wang, X., Lin, Y., Ran, , 2021. Connected automated vehicle cooperative control with a deep reinforcement learning
approach in a mixed traffic environment. Transportation Research Part C: Emerging Technologies 133, 103421. doi:10.1016/j.trc.2021.
103421.
Sumanth Nakka, S.K., Chalaki, B., Malikopoulos, A.A., 2022. A multi-agent deep reinforcement learning coordination framework for connected
and automated vehicles at merging roadways, in: 2022 American Control Conference (ACC), pp. 3297–3302.
Sun, R., Luo, Q., Chen, Y., 2023. Online transportation network cyber-attack detection based on stationary sensor data. Transportation Research
Part C: Emerging Technologies 149, 104058. doi:10.1016/j.trc.2023.104058.
Tanaji, B.A., Roychowdhury, S., 2024. A survey of cybersecurity challenges and mitigation techniques for connected and autonomous vehicles.
IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Vehicles , 1–18doi:10.1109/TIV.2024.3493938.
Tessler, C., Efroni, Y., Mannor, S., 2019. Action robust reinforcement learning and applications in continuous control, in: International Conference
on Machine Learning.
Wang, L., Others, 2023. A multi-agent reinforcement learning-based longitudinal and lateral control of cavs to improve traffic efficiency in a
mandatory lane change scenario. Transportation Research Part C: Emerging Technologies 148, 103535. doi:10.1016/j.trc.2023.103535.
Wang, T., Ma, M., Liang, S., Yang, J., Wang, Y., 2025. Robust lane change decision for autonomous vehicles in mixed traffic: A safety-aware
multi-agent adversarial reinforcement learning approach. Transportation Research Part C: Emerging Technologies 172, 105005. doi:10.1016/
j.trc.2025.105005.
Wang, Y., Sagawa, R., 2022. Manipulator motion planning via centralized training and decentralized execution multi-agent reinforcement learning,
in: 2022 International Conference on Advanced Robotics and Mechatronics (ICARM), pp. 812–817.
Ying, J., Feng, Y., 2024. Infrastructure-assisted cooperative driving and intersection management in mixed traffic conditions. Transportation
Research Part C: Emerging Technologies 158, 104443. doi:10.1016/j.trc.2024.104443.
Yu, C., Velu, A., Vinitsky, E., Wang, Y., Bayen, A.M., Wu, Y., 2021. The surprising effectiveness of ppo in cooperative multi-agent games, in:
Neural Information Processing Systems.
Yu, C., Wang, X., Xu, X., Zhang, M., Ge, H., Ren, J., Sun, L., Chen, B., Tan, G., 2020.
Distributed multiagent coordinated learning for
autonomous driving in highways based on dynamic coordination graphs. IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems 21, 735–748.
doi:10.1109/TITS.2019.2893683.
Zeng, J., Zhang, B., Sreenath, K., 2021. Safety-critical model predictive control with discrete-time control barrier function, in: 2021 American
Control Conference (ACC), pp. 3882–3889. doi:10.23919/ACC50511.2021.9483029.
Zhan, W., Liao, B., Tomizuka, M., et al., 2019. Interaction dataset: An international, adversarial and cooperative motion dataset in interactive driving
scenarios with semantic maps, in: IEEE Intelligent Vehicles Symposium (IV), pp. 233–240.
Zhang, J., Li, S., Li, L., 2023. Coordinating cav swarms at intersections with a deep learning model. IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation
Systems 24, 6280–6291.
Zhang, X., Zhao, C., Liao, F., Li, X., Du, Y., 2022. Online parking assignment in an environment of partially connected vehicles: A multi-agent deep
reinforcement learning approach. Transportation Research Part C: Emerging Technologies 138, 103624. doi:10.1016/j.trc.2022.103624.
Zhao, T., Xu, Y., Monfort, M., Choi, W., Baker, C., Zhao, Y., Wang, Y., Wu, Y.N., 2019. Multi-agent tensor fusion for contextual trajectory prediction.
2019 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , 12118–12126.
Zhao, X., . Prediction-Adversarial-MARL . URL: https://github.com/xzhao391/Prediction-Adversarial-MARL/tree/main.
Zhao, X., Hu, H., Sun, D., 2024. Cooperation with humans of unknown intentions in confined spaces using the stackelberg friend-or-foe game.
IEEE Transactions on Aerospace and Electronic Systems , 1–13doi:10.1109/TAES.2024.3521935.
Zhou, C., AlRegib, G., Parchami, A., Singh, K., 2024. Trajpred: Trajectory prediction with region-based relation learning. IEEE Transactions on
Intelligent Transportation Systems 25, 9787–9796.
Xiaofeng Zhao: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 13 of 13
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=5348784
Preprint not peer reviewed
