3096
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE, VOL. 46, NO. 5, MAY 2024
Robust Multi-Agent Communication With Graph
Information Bottleneck Optimization
Shifei Ding
, Member, IEEE, Wei Du
, Ling Ding
, Jian Zhang
, Lili Guo
, Member, IEEE,
and Bo An
, Member, IEEE
Abstract—Recent research on multi-agent reinforcement learn-
ing(MARL)has shownthatactioncoordinationofmulti-agents can
be signiﬁcantly enhanced by introducing communication learning
mechanisms. Meanwhile, graph neural network (GNN) provides
a promising paradigm for communication learning of MARL.
Under this paradigm, agents and communication channels can
be regarded as nodes and edges in the graph, and agents can
aggregate information from neighboring agents through GNN.
However, this GNN-based communication paradigm is suscepti-
ble to adversarial attacks and noise perturbations, and how to
achieve robust communication learning under perturbations has
been largely neglected. To this end, this paper explores this problem
and introduces a robust communication learning mechanism with
graph information bottleneck optimization, which can optimally
realize the robustness and effectiveness of communication learning.
We introduce two information-theoretic regularizers to learn the
minimal sufﬁcient message representation for multi-agent commu-
nication. The regularizers aim at maximizing the mutual informa-
tion (MI) between the message representation and action selection
while minimizing the MI between the agent feature and message
representation. Besides, we present a MARL framework that can
integrate the proposed communication mechanism with existing
value decomposition methods. Experimental results demonstrate
that the proposed method is more robust and efﬁcient than state-
of-the-art GNN-based MARL methods.
Index
Terms—Graph
neural
network,
multi-agent
rein-
forcement
learning,
graph
information
bottleneck
optimi-
zation, communication learning.
Manuscript received 14 April 2023; revised 7 November 2023; accepted 27
November 2023. Date of publication 29 November 2023; date of current version
3 April 2024. This work was supported by the National Natural Science Founda-
tion of China under Grants 62276265, 61976216, and 62206297. Recommended
for acceptance by W. Zhang. (Corresponding authors: Wei Du; Ling Ding.)
Shifei Ding is with the School of Computer Science and Technology,
China University of Mining and Technology, Xuzhou 221116, China, and
also with the Mine Digitization Engineering Research Center of Ministry of
Education of the People’s Republic of China, Xuzhou 221116, China (e-mail:
dingsf@cumt.edu.cn).
Wei Du is with the School of Computer Science and Technology, China
University of Mining and Technology, Xuzhou 221116, China (e-mail:
1394471165@qq.com).
Ling Ding is with the College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin Uni-
versity, Tianjin 300350, China (e-mail: 414211048@qq.com).
Jian Zhang and Lili Guo are with the School of Computer Science and
Technology, China University of Mining and Technology, Xuzhou 221116,
China (e-mail: zhangjian10231209@cumt.edu.cn; liliguo@cumt.edu.cn).
Bo An is with the School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanyang
Technological University, Singapore 639798 (e-mail: boan@ntu.edu.sg).
Digital Object Identiﬁer 10.1109/TPAMI.2023.3337534
I. INTRODUCTION
R
EINFORCEMENT
learning
has
achieved
notable
progress in tackling single-agent complicated tasks, such
as robot navigation [1] and vehicle control [2]. Meanwhile,
many real-world scenarios such as intelligent trafﬁc systems [3],
contain not only one agent but usually multiple agents involved
in learning cooperative tasks. Such scenarios naturally lead
to the prevalence of multi-agent reinforcement learning
(MARL), where crucial challenges include scalability and
non-stationarity (caused by partial observability limitation).
Recently,theparadigmofcentralizedtrainingwithdecentralized
execution (CTDE) has been comprehensively adopted to tackle
these challenges, in which agents execute only based on
decentralized local information but their policies can be trained
with additional global information [4], [5]. Value function
decomposition methods [6], [7], [8], [9] further explore this
paradigm, which decomposes the global value function into a
set of individual value functions. However, these methods still
fail to perform well in scenarios where action coordination is
required, because the partial observability during the execution
period will increase the uncertainty of one agent to actions of
other agents, resulting in difﬁculty in action coordination.
Allowing agents to learn to communicate efﬁciently can
strengthen action coordination and eventually enhance the qual-
ity of learned policies. To this end, numerous multi-agent com-
municative reinforcement learning (MACRL) methods [10],
[11], [12], [13], [14], [15] have been proposed, which allow
agents to exchange messages during the decentralized execution
phase, such as local individual observations or agent feature
embeddings. Recently, graph neural network (GNN) has been
developed as an efﬁcient representation learning method, which
can process the topological information and attribute infor-
mation of the graph-structured data to feature representation
learning for the ﬁnal tasks. GNN has been utilized to build com-
munication learning mechanisms of MACRL, which generally
regards agents and communication channels as nodes and edges
in the graph, with the action selection corresponding to node
labeling. Many state-of-the-art MACRL methods fall into this
GNN-based communication paradigm, such as TarMAC [16].
The crucial task of GNN-based MACRL is to learn efﬁcient
message representation that carries both agent feature informa-
tion and topological relationship information for action selection
and coordination. However, the message representation learning
of recent GNN-based MACRL methods still encounter some
0162-8828 © 2023 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Texas at Arlington. Downloaded on June 27,2026 at 06:16:26 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

DING et al.: ROBUST MULTI-AGENT COMMUNICATION WITH GRAPH INFORMATION BOTTLENECK OPTIMIZATION
3097
Fig. 1.
MAGI aims at optimizing the communication message representation
to extract sufﬁcient and minimal information within the D = (A, H) to select
optimal actions Y .
challenges. On the one side, the message representation ag-
gregates the information of features of neighbor agents, which
may contain useless information that negatively affects action
selection. On the other side, GNN-based MACRL relies on
the edges of the graph to implement the messages exchange
among agents, which makes it susceptible to adversarial attacks
and noise perturbations on the agent features and topological
structure.
AsshowninFig.1,D = (A, H)carriesinformationfromboth
the graph topological structure A and agent feature embeddings
H. If communication message representation carries irrelevant
information from A and H, it is susceptible to hyperparameter
change of model, adversarial attacks, and noise perturbations
on D. The performance of MACRL methods tends to degrade
under adversarial attacks, which can leave many practical ap-
plications based on MACRL models at high risk. For example,
researchers have shown that in multi-agent autonomous driving
systems, adversarial attacks on the communication process be-
tween multi-agent vehicles can trick autonomous vehicles into
making abnormal judgments, such as driving into the opposite
lane [17].
Therefore, in this paper, we rethink what is and how to
obtain an “optimal” communication message representation that
contains sufﬁcient information to facilitate action coordination
while avoiding the impact of adversarial attacks. For general
representation learning, the Information Bottleneck (IB) [18]
introduces an essential principle: the optimal representation
should contain sufﬁcient and minimal information useful for
the ﬁnal tasks. Inspired by this principle, we deﬁne the optimal
message representation as the representation that contains suf-
ﬁcient and minimal information for the action selection task
as shown in Fig. 1. However, extending the IB principle to
GNN-based MACRL methods to obtain the optimal message
encounters two main challenges as follows. 1) The topological
structure information contained in the graph structure is essential
for communication message representation, but this information
is discrete and therefore it is difﬁcult to optimize. 2) Previous IB-
based representation learning methods generally restricts input
data to satisfy independent and identically distributed condition
(i.i.d.). Therefore, the IB principle is difﬁcult to implement in
MACRL, because conditions are not supported for the agent
feature.
To tackle these challenges, we propose a Multi-Agent com-
munication mechanism with Graph Information bottleneck op-
timization (MAGI) for communication message representa-
tion learning. To address the ﬁrst challenge, we propose two
information-theoretic regularizers to derive the minimal sufﬁ-
cient communication message: one to constrain the information
from the graph topological structure and agent feature embed-
dings, and the other to maximize the information for the action
selection and coordination in the message representation. With
these two regularizers, we can ensure that learned communica-
tion messages is both sufﬁcient (efﬁciently facilitating the action
selection of agents) and minimal (message representations do
not contain unnecessary information). In addition, to address
the second challenge caused by the non-i.i.d. property of agent
features, we leverage the local-dependence assumption of agent
features to capture information from graph topological structure
A and agent feature embeddings H hierarchically. The main
contributions of our work are summarized as follows:
1) To the best knowledge, our work is the ﬁrst attempt to
extend the graph information bottleneck principle [19]
to GNN-based MACRL methods, which achieve efﬁcient
and robust multi-agent communication learning.
2) We propose two information-theoretic regularizers to ob-
tain the optimal message representation that contains suf-
ﬁcient and minimal information for action selection and
action coordination downstream tasks.
3) We propose a general MARL framework that can ﬂexibly
integrate the proposed communication learning mecha-
nism with any value function factorization methods.
4) We evaluate the proposed method on several MARL en-
vironments, including SMAC [20] and MAgent [21]. Ex-
perimental results demonstrate that MAGI is more robust
and efﬁcient than the state-of-the-art MACRL methods.
II. RELATED WORK
A. Multi-Agent Communicative Reinforcement Learning
Multi-agent communicative reinforcement learning methods
aim at achieving consensus and cooperation of multiple agents
through communication learning. Agents need to enhance action
coordination by learning to communicate with other agents
and process the message representations they receive. Previous
MACRL methods can be divided into two main categories. The
ﬁrst category focuses on generating meaningful messages for the
message senders. One straightforward approach is to treat raw
local observations or the local information history as messages.
For example, NDQ [11] aims to generate minimal messages
for different teammates, allowing them to learn decomposable
value functions. NDQ optimizes the message generator utiliz-
ing two information-theoretic regularizers to achieve expressive
communication.
The second category of work aims to efﬁciently extract
the most useful messages at the receiver’s end. For example,
MASIA [12] explicitly addresses the optimization of multiple
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Texas at Arlington. Downloaded on June 27,2026 at 06:16:26 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

3098
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE, VOL. 46, NO. 5, MAY 2024
received messages and introduces two self-supervised represen-
tation objectives. These objectives aim to make the received
information representation both abstract of the true states and
predictive of the multi-step future information. TarMAC [15]
achieves targeted communication through a soft-attention mech-
anism, in which the sender broadcasts a key encoding the agents’
properties, and the receiver processes all received messages for
a weighted sum of messages to make decisions.
The most relevant works to the idea of this paper are NDQ [11]
and MASIA [12], both of which aim to achieve efﬁcient commu-
nication. NDQ aims to ensure communication is both expressive
(effectively reducing the uncertainty of action-value functions
of agents) and succinct (only sending necessary and useful
information). MASIA focuses on ensuring communication is
both compact (high information density) and sufﬁcient (con-
taining a rich amount of information). Our method is designed
to ensure communication is sufﬁcient (efﬁciently facilitating the
action selection of agents), minimal (not containing unnecessary
information), and robust (not vulnerable to adversarial attacks
and noise). Different from NDQ and MASIA, we aim at the
redundancy and efﬁciency issue of communication information
in the GNN-based MACRL methods and consider the robustness
of these methods, which NDQ and MASIA do not pay attention
to.
B. GNN-Based MACRL
In contrast to the above methods, GNN-based MACRL meth-
ods generally utilize neighboring communication architecture.
In this architecture, agents communicate with neighbors simul-
taneously, which can reduce communication costs. Meanwhile,
the powerful information aggregation ability and representa-
tion learning capability provided by GNN can make GNN-
based MACRL methods suitable for large-scale agent scenarios.
DGN [22] ﬁrst extends GNN to MACRL methods and adopts
neighboring architecture, where multiple rounds of communi-
cations are utilized to widen the receptive ﬁeld. NerveNet [23]
utilizes GNN to represent the policy of the agent and propagate
information over the graph structure of agents and then predicts
actions for the agents.
HAMA[24]adoptsahierarchicalGNNbasedonapre-deﬁned
hierarchical graph and attention mechanism to facilitate agents
to capture interrelations. However, the predeﬁned ﬁxed grouping
scheme adopted by HAMA restricts its adaptability in dynamic
settings. GA2NET [25] adopts a two-stage attentional mecha-
nism to model the multi-agent setting, which can infer whether
there is interaction between two agents and then evaluate the
importance of interaction. TarMAC [16] utilizes GNN with a
soft attention mechanism to learn whom to receive messages
and what messages to pass. MAGIC [15] presents an attentional
GNN to operate on the constructed graph for multiple rounds of
communication, which can tackle the issue of when to commu-
nicate.
Recent GNN-based MACRL methods have successfully pro-
moted action coordination by efﬁcient communication learning,
which aggregates information on agent features and models
interactions among agents by diverse graph neural networks.
Despite signiﬁcant progress in GNN-based MACRL, if these
methods encounter adversarial attacks and noise perturbations,
multi-agent action coordination will rapidly disintegrate. The
issue that how to achieve robust communication under adversar-
ial attacks and noise perturbations has been largely unstudied.
Our work intends to provide a promising way to address this,
which extends the graph information bottleneck optimization to
GNN-based MACRL methods.
C. Value Function Decomposition
For effectiveness and scalability in multi-agent environments,
CTDE has become a prevalent MARL paradigm. Value function
factorization methods further explore the CTDE paradigm based
on the Individual-Global-Max (IGM) principle [9], which is
an essential assumption that ensures consistency between local
greedy action selections and joint action selections. VDN [7]
adopts linear value factorization to ensure the sufﬁcient con-
dition for the IGM principle. Due to its excellent scalabil-
ity, this simple linear architecture has become very preva-
lent in MARL and has inspired many subsequent approaches.
QMIX [8] presents a monotonic mixing network to enhance the
expressiveness of the decomposed function class. QTRAN [6]
aims at realizing the entire IGM function class, however, its
proposed goal is computationally intractable and necessitates
two additional soft regularizers to approximate IGM, where the
strict IGM guarantee is not guaranteed. QPLEX [9] extends the
IGM principle into the dueling network architecture, however,
it has potential limitations in terms of scalability. Our work
utilizes different value decomposition methods in the proposed
MARL framework to demonstrate the ﬂexibility of the proposed
method.
D. Adversarial Attack
Sun et al. [26] introduce a general deﬁnition of adversarial
attacks on graph data: (General Adversarial Attack on Graph
Data) Given a graph data D = (A, H), after slightly modifying
D (denoted as D), the adversarial samples D and D should be
similar under the imperceptibility metrics, but the performance
of graph downstream task (such as action selection task in
our work) becomes much worse than before. In general, the
adversarial perturbations can be categorized as modifying node
features, modifying (adding/deleting) edges.
1) Modifying node features: Adversarial attacks can slightly
modify the node features while maintaining the structure of
the graph. Ma et al. [27] add adversarial perturbation on node
features and set a novel local constraint on node access, pro-
hibiting perturbation on the top node, and only a few nodes can
be disturbed, which is more realistic in practice. Wu et al. [28]
present an integrated gradients-based attack method that adds
perturbations on both the node features and edges. 2) Modifying
Edges: Adversarial attacks can add or delete edges to existing
nodes with a given total action budget. Xu et al. [29] present
a novel gradient-based attack method that only changes a small
number of edges, including addition and deletion. However, this
method can lead to a noticeable decrease in the performance of
downstream tasks. Zang et al. [30] ﬁnd a set of anchor nodes to
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Texas at Arlington. Downloaded on June 27,2026 at 06:16:26 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

DING et al.: ROBUST MULTI-AGENT COMMUNICATION WITH GRAPH INFORMATION BOTTLENECK OPTIMIZATION
3099
mislead the classiﬁcation of all nodes in the graph by ﬂipping
the connections between the anchors and the target node.
E. Adversarial Attacks and Defenses in MACRL
Robust single-agent RL has been investigated from different
perspectives [31], and recently, the issue of adversarial attacks
and defenses in MACRL has gained signiﬁcant attention. Re-
searchers have been exploring various approaches to achieve
robust communication in the face of adversarial attacks. Tu et
al. [32] focus on exploring adversarial attacks speciﬁcally in
the multi-agent setting where perturbations are introduced to
learnedintermediaterepresentations.Mitchelletal.[33]propose
a method that utilizes a Gaussian Process-based probabilistic
module to calculate posterior probabilities, determining the
truthfulness of each partner. Xue et al. [34] propose a two-stage
message ﬁlter that involves learning an anomaly detector and
a message reconstructor to recover the true messages. They
employ two populations of defenders and attackers for training,
aiming to improve the generalizability of defense mechanisms.
Sun et al. [35] introduce the ﬁrst certiﬁable defense in MARL
against communication attacks, which considers a particularly
strong threat model in which half of communication messages
can be arbitrarily compromised. Nevertheless, these previous
methods generally focus on the malicious perturbations on the
receivedmessageitself,buttheadversarialattackscanalsobethe
perturbations on the communication structure and agent feature,
which has not been paid attention to in the previous work.
This paper tries to solve this problem by using the GNN-based
MACRL methods as a starting point.
III. METHODOLOGY
A. Problem Fomulation
The MARL problems can be generally modeled as a De-
centralized Partially Observable Markov Decision Process
(Dec-POMDP), which can be characterized by a tuple <
I, S, U, P, R, O >. I represents the ﬁnite set of agents indexed
from 1 to n. S represents the ﬁnite set of states. O denotes
the joint observations, in which oi ∈O is local observation of
agent i. U represents the ﬁnite space of joint actions. At each
timestep, the agent i takes its action ai depending on its local
observation oi. a = (a1, . . . , an) ∈U denotes a joint action.
The state changes depending on the Markovian transition P :
S × U →S. R : S × U →R represents the reward function.
The overall task of the agent i is maximizing its total discounted
reward Ri = T
t=0 γtrt
i, where γ ∈[0, 1] means a discount
factor. Agents aim to learn an optimal joint policy π(τ, a) to
maximize the global value Qπ
tot(τ, a) = Es,a[∞
t=0 γtR(s, a)],
where τ means the joint observation history.
In our work, we model the multi-agent system utilizing a
graph G = (V, E, H) with n nodes, where V = {1, 2, . . . n}
means the agent/node set, E ⊆V × V represents the edge set,
H ∈Rn×f means the agent features/node attributes. We utilize
A ∈R n×n to denote the adjacency matrix of G, if (i, j) ∈E,
then Aij = 1, otherwise Aij = 0. We leverage d(i, j) to denote
theshortestpathdistanceoftwoagentsi, j(∈V ).Thus,theinput
Fig. 2.
Overall framework of MAGI.
feature information data for the GNN-based communication
learning mechanism can be overall denoted as D = (A, H).
We focus on extracting agent-level message representations
MH ∈Rn×f ′ from D so that MH can be utilized to facilitate the
agent to select actions Y . The subscript with an agent i ∈V is
leveraged to denote the afﬁliation with the agent i. For example,
the communication message representation of agent i is denoted
by MH,i = mi and its corresponding optimal action selection is
represented by Yi = ai.
B. Overall Framework
The overall framework of the proposed method is illustrated
in Fig. 2. For agent i, it obtains local observation oi and utilizes
gated recurrent unit (GRU) and multi-layer perceptron (MLP)
to generate the agent feature hi. Then we fed feature hi into the
communication learning module, where graph neural network is
leveragedtoproducethecommunicationmessagerepresentation
mi. In our work, we utilize graph attention network (GAT) [36]
as the GNN structure in the communication learning module.
We fuse the feature information of neighbor agents and topo-
logical structure information by stacking multiple GNN layers.
High-levelcommunicationmessagerepresentationofeachagent
can be extracted by multiple rounds of communication. Besides,
we utilize graph information bottleneck optimization to further
obtain the optimal message representations, which are minimal
and sufﬁcient for decision making.
Then, for agent i, the message mi is concatenated with the
current local history τi to serve as an input to the local action-
value function Qi(τi, ai, mi). As shown in Fig. 2, we fed local
action-values of all agents into the mixing network and ﬁnally
obtained the estimation of global action-value Qtot. In this work,
we select the mixing networks proposed by VDN [7], QMIX [8],
and QPLEX [9], and it can be ﬂexibly replaced by other mixing
networks of existing value factorization methods. For instance,
in the case of QMIX, the mixing network consists of MLPs.
However, the weights and biases of the mixing network are
obtained from a hypernetwork to ensure adherence to the mono-
tonicity constraints. In the next section, we will introduce the
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Texas at Arlington. Downloaded on June 27,2026 at 06:16:26 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

3100
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE, VOL. 46, NO. 5, MAY 2024
multi-agent communication via graph information bottleneck
optimization (MAGI) module of this framework in detail.
C. Multi-Agent Communication via Graph Information
Bottleneck
The objective of the Multi-Agent communication via Graph
Information bottleneck (MAGI) module is to obtain the optimal
communication message representation, which is minimal and
sufﬁcient. To achieve this objective, MAGI necessitates the com-
munication message MH to maximize the mutual information
for selecting optimal actions Y and minimize the information
from the feature D = (A, H). The objective of MAGI is repre-
sented in (1), where I(·; ·) means the mutual information,
min MAGIβ(D, Y ; M) ≜[−I(Y ; M) + βI(D; M)].
(1)
In the MAGI, we introduce a local-dependence assumption [19]
for the graph-structured agent features: for each agent i, given
the neighbor-related agents within certain hops, the other agent
features are independent of the agent feature of agent i. We
utilize this assumption to restrict the optimal communication
message representations space Ω, which makes the optimization
of the MAGI objective more tractable. Concretely, we utilize
P(MH | D) to hierarchically iterate communication message
representations to model the correlation of agent features, where
P(·) means joint probabilistic distribution function. Each GNN
layer corresponds to a round of communication message ex-
change among the agent with its neighboring agents.
In each message exchange round l, we utilize the local-
dependence assumption. The communication message of each
agent can be reﬁned by aggregating the agent features of
its neighboring agents, w.r.t a graph structure M l
A. Thus,
(M l
A)1≤l≤L is obtained by adjusting the original graph topo-
logical structure A locally, which can essentially control the
message ﬂow from graph topological structure A. In the end, we
utilize high-level communication message representation M l
H to
achieve action selection and action coordination. Therefore, the
objective of MAGI optimization can be reduced to the following
representation:
min
P(M l
H|D)∈Ω MAGIβ(D, Y ; M l
H)
≜

−I(Y ; M L
H) + βI(D; M L
H)

,
(2)
In this equation, we just need to optimize the distributions of
these two series: P(M l
H | M l−1
H , M l
A) and P(M l
A | M l−1
H , A).
Thesedistributionsareeasiertooptimizebecausetheyhavelocal
dependence between agents. We utilize the simplistic MAGI
principle and some appropriate parameterization of P(M l
H |
M l−1
H , M l
A) and P(M l
A | M l−1
H , A), however, the computation
of I(Y ; M L
H) and I(D; M L
H) of (2) is still intractable. Thus, we
should introduce variational bound regularizers on the two terms
of (2), which facilitates the optimization of the ﬁnal objective.
As demonstrated in [18], we can derive the lower bound of
term I(Y ; M L
H) and the upper bound of term I(D; M L
H), which
are shown in (3) and (4), respectively. For any distributions
V1(Yi | M L
H,i) for agent i ∈V and V2(Y ), the lower bound
of term I(Y ; M L
H) is shown in (3),
I(Y ; M L
H) ≥1 + E

log

i∈V V1(Yi | M L
H,i)
V2(Y )

+ EP(Y )P(ML
H)

i∈V V1(Yi | M L
H,i)
V2(Y )

.
(3)
We choose two sets of indices SH, SA ⊂[L] such that D ⊥
M L
H | (M l
H)l∈SH ∪(M l
A)l∈SA depending on the Markovian de-
pendence, where the M1 ⊥M2 | M3 denote that M1 and M2
are conditionally independent given the M3. For the any distri-
butions V(M l
H), l ∈SH and V(M l
A), l ∈SA,
I(D; M L
H) ≤I
	
D; (M l
H)l∈SH ∪(M l
A)l∈SA

≤

l∈SA
AIBl +

l∈SH
HIBl,
(4)
AIBl = E

log P(M l
A | A, M l−1
H )
V(M l
A)

,
(5)
HIBl = E

log P(Zl
X | M l−1
H , M l
A)
V
	
M l
H


.
(6)
Equation (4) illustrates that we should select a set of random
variables with index SH and SA to satisfy the conditional inde-
pendence between M L
H and D. SH and SA have the following
attributes: 1) If the maximum index in SH is l, the SA includes all
the integers of [l + 1, L]. 2) SH ̸= ∅. To utilize MAGI principle,
we should model P(M l
A | M l−1
H , A) and P(M l
H | M l−1
H , M l
A).
Next, we select certain variational distributions V(M l
H) and
V(M l
A) to estimate the corresponding AIBl and HIBl for the
regularization, and some V1(Yi | M L
H,i. and V2(Y ) to obtain
the lower bound in (3). Thus, we can acquire the upper bound
to optimize the objective by plugging (3) and (4) into the (2).
In this work, we leverage graph attention network (GAT) [36]
as the GNN structure in the communication learning module. In
each layer of the graph attention network, MAGI ﬁrst needs
to reﬁne the graph structure of agents utilizing the attention
weights to acquire M l
A and next reﬁne communication message
representations M l
H by propagating M l−1
H
over M l
A. For the
neighboring agents sampling, we leverage categorical distribu-
tion and regard attention weights as the parameters of the cate-
gorical distributions, which can sample the topological structure
of the reﬁned graph to capture topological structure information.
Next, we extract k neighboring agents with alternatives from the
built pool of agents Vic for agent i, in which Vic contains the
agents whose shortest path distance to agent i is c. We leverage
C to be the upper constraint of c to guarantee the assumption
of local dependence. Next, we sum-pool the neighboring agents
and utilize the output to calculate the parameters of the Gaussian
distribution, in which the reﬁned agent features will be sampled.
Then,weaimtooptimizetheparametersoftheMAGImodule.
The bounds of term I(Y ; M L
H) in (3) and term I(D; M L
H)
in (4) should be speciﬁed, further the bound of MAGI op-
timization objective in (2) should be calculated. In order to
characterize AIBl in (4), we take assumption that V(M l
A) sat-
isﬁes the non-informative distribution. Concretely, we leverage
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Texas at Arlington. Downloaded on June 27,2026 at 06:16:26 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

DING et al.: ROBUST MULTI-AGENT COMMUNICATION WITH GRAPH INFORMATION BOTTLENECK OPTIMIZATION
3101
the uniform categorical distribution: MA ∼V(MA), MA,i =
∪T
d=1{j ∈Vic | j
iid∼Cat(
1
|Vic|)} and MA,i ⊥MA,j if i ̸= j.
We leverage Cat(φ) to denote the categorical distribution with
parameter φ, which corresponds to different categories of prob-
abilities and therefore ∥φ∥1 = 1. After φl
ic is calculated, we can
acquire an empirical estimation of AIBl,

AIB
l = EP(M l
A|A,M l−1
H )

log P(M l
A | A, M l−1
X )
V(M l
A)

,
(7)
which is instantiated as follows,

AIB
l =

i∈V,d∈[T ]
KL

Cat(φl
id)|| Cat

1
|Vid|

.
(8)
To further estimate HIBl, we conduct V(M l
H) as a mixture
of Gaussian distributions. Concretely, for any agent i, MH ∼
V(MH),
we
set
MH,i ∼m
u=1 wu Gaussian(μ0,u, σ2
0,u),
where wu, μ0,u, σ0,u mean learnable parameters shared by all
agents and MH,i ⊥MH,j, if i ̸= j. We can estimate HIBl by
leveraging the sampled M l
H:

HIB
l =

i∈V
⎡
⎣log Φ
	
M l
H,i; μi, σ2
i

−log
 n

u=1
wuΦ
	
M l
H,i; μ0,u, σ2
0,u

 ⎤
⎦.
(9)
Thus, we can select appropriate index set SH, SA that guarantee
the assumption in (4) and utilize substitution:
I(D; M L
H) →

l∈SA

AIB
l +

l∈SH

HIB
l.
(10)
To characterize (3), we can straightly set V2(Y ) = P(Y ) and
V1(Yi | ZL
H,i) = Cat(M L
H,i)Wout Thus, the (3) can reduce to
the cross-entropy loss without constants as follows,
I(Y ; M L
H) →−

i∈V
Cross-Entropy (M L
H,iWout ; Yi).
(11)
Plugging(10)and(11)into(2),theMAGIoptimizationobjective
can be obtained to train our proposed communication learning
module.
Except for the MAGI optimization constraints on the commu-
nication message representations learning in the communication
module, all the parameters in other modules in the framework
are updated by minimizing the TD loss LT D. In the end, TD
loss is shown in (12),
LT D =

r + γ max
a′
Qtot
	
τ ′, a′; θ−
−Qtot(τ, a; θ)
2
, (12)
where θ means all the parameters in the proposed method and
θ−means the parameters of target network. The overall opti-
mization objective of the proposed method is shown as follows,
L = LT D + λLIB,
(13)
where λ denotes a hyper-parameter that can be ﬁne-tuned to
achieve a trade-off between the graph information bottleneck
Algorithm 1: Instantiation of MAGI.
Input: oi ∈O and at−1
i
∈A of agent i.
Initialize: The weights of networks W, the number of
neighboring agents to be sampled k, the integral
limitation to impose local dependence C.
Output: Qtot.
1: for each timestep t ∈T do
2:
for each agent i ∈N do
3:
% During the decentralized execution phase
4:
Process agent feature hi by GRU and MLP
5:
Build data matrix D = (A, H) based on hi
6:
Fed D to L−layers GAT
7:
for layers = 1, . . . , L do
8:
˜
M l−1
H,i ←σ(M l−1
H,i )W l
9:
build sets Vic ←{j ∈V | d(i, j) = c}
10:
for c ∈[C] do
11:
φl
ic ←softmax{( ˜
M l−1
H,i ⊕˜
M l−1
H,j)aT }
12:
M l
A,i ←∪C
c=1{j ∈Vic | j
iid∼Cat(φl−1
ic )}
13:
end for
14:
¯
M l
H,i ←
j∈M l
H,i ˜
M l−1
A,i
15:
μl
i ←¯
M l
H,i[0 : f ′]
16:
σ2 l
i
←softplus( ¯
M l
H,i[f ′ : 2f ′])
17:
M l
H,i ∼Gaussian(μl
i, σ2 l
i )
18:
end for
19:
Acquire ﬁnal message representation mi = M L
H,i
20:
Compute action-value Qi based on mi and τi
21:
at
i ←π(Qi)(ϵ−greed)
22:
Store episode history τi and at
i in replay buffer
23:
% During centralized training phase
24:
Fed Qi to mixing network and acquire Qtot
25:
Minimize loss function according to (13)
26:
Update weights W of all networks
27:
end for
28: end for
optimization loss LIB = MAGIβ(D, Y ; M l
H) and the TD loss
LT D. The hyper-parameter λ is set to be λ = 0.1 depending on
experimental results.
Thedetailoftheinstantiationoftheproposedmethodisshown
in Algorithm 1. Steps 1-4 show the feature processing phase. For
each timestep t ∈T, each agent i ∈N obtains its observation oi
and uses GRU and MLP to generate its initial agent feature. Steps
5-6 describe the process of building a graph using agent features.
The core process of message representation optimization is
instantiated in Steps 7-18. In each layer, MAGI ﬁrst reﬁnes the
graph structure utilizing the attention weights to obtain M l
A,i
(Steps 8-13) and then reﬁnes message representations M l
H,i by
propagating M l−1
H,i over M l
A,i (Steps 14-18).
Step 14 is the sum-pooling operation of the neighbor agents,
and the output will be leveraged to calculate the parameters
for a Gaussian distribution in which the reﬁned message rep-
resentations will be sampled. MAGI relies loosely on the graph
structure because A is only utilized to decide the potential
neighbor agents for each agent, and performs message passing
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Texas at Arlington. Downloaded on June 27,2026 at 06:16:26 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

3102
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE, VOL. 46, NO. 5, MAY 2024
Fig. 3.
Illustration of the SMAC scenarios.
depending on MA. This property makes our models very robust
against structural attacks/perturbations. Our models also keep
robustness to the feature perturbations, which is similar to other
IB-based methods. In Steps 19-22, agent i calculates the local
value based on the obtained message mi and then selects action
at
i. In Steps 23-27 describe the centralized training phase, which
uses the loss function in (13).
IV. EXPERIMENTS
In this section, we select StarCraft II Multi-Agent Challenge
(SMAC) [20] and MAgent [21] as our benchmarks. We con-
duct various experiments on these complicated benchmarks to
answer: Q1: Are the proposed method and other GNN-based
MACRL methods vulnerable to adversarial attacks and noise
perturbations? Q2: Can MAGI optimization enhance the ro-
bustness of communication learning under adversarial attacks
and noise perturbations? Q3: Can MAGI achieve efﬁcient com-
munication that facilitates action coordination? Q4: Whether
MAGI can be applied to large-scale multi-agent scenarios? Q5:
Which component of the proposed framework contributes to the
performance improvement? Q6: Can MAGI ﬂexibly integrate
with existing value function factorization methods? Q7: How
do hyper-parameters inﬂuence the performance of MAGI? Q8:
How does MAGI perform well under more complicated adver-
sarial attack methods? We choose QMIX [8], TarMAC [16], and
MAGIC [15] as baselines. QMIX proposes a mixing network
where the joint action value is estimated through a nonlinear
combination of individual action values. TarMAC employs GAT
with a soft attention mechanism to determine the extent to which
a message is processed. MAGIC constructs a communication
graph and utilizes GAT for multiple iterations of communica-
tion. It is worth noting that TarMAC, MAGIC, and MAGI all
leverage GAT as a GNN structure in the communication learning
module. The experiments are all conducted on GPU Nvidia RTX
2080Ti with Pytorch.
A. Environments
SMAC: StarCraft Multi-Agent Challenge (SMAC) is con-
structed on StarCraft II, which is a prevalent strategy game.
SMAC consists of various StarCraft II micro scenarios, the
example is shown in Fig. 3. These scenarios are complicated,
in which the ally agents are necessitated to learn no less than
one micromanagement technology to defeat the enemy agents.
In the scenarios of SMAC, all the ally agents are trained with
the MARL methods, and all the enemy agents are controlled by
the built-in AI.
The action space of agents contains 4 actions: move, attack,
no-op, and stop. The range of attack is set to 6. At each time
step, the ally agents can take attack action to ﬁre enemy agents
and acquire a global reward. Besides, the ally agents can ac-
quire an extra reward for killing the enemy agent and winning
the game. In particular, we ﬁne-tune the default experimental
setting to make the ally agents more difﬁcult to coordinate
actions. We reduce the scope of vision of the ally agent from
9 to 2. In addition, we select several complicated scenarios as
shown in Table I. The details of the 5 scenarios are provided as
follows.
MMM2 and MMM3 are two super-hard scenarios, which
contain Marines, Marauders, and Medivac. Each type of agent
in these scenarios has its own unique attributes and skills. The
ally agents succeed only when each agent performs to the best of
its ability and coordinates the actions of other agents. Medivac
has the healing ability that can provide treatment to the injured
ally agents. To win the battle, Ally agents have to learn to
communicate with other agents, such as sending their health
situation to the Medivac.
1o2r versus 4r scenario includes 1 Overseer and 2 Roaches of
ally agents. The target of the Overseer is to ﬁnd the 4 Reapers
of enemy units, and the goal of the 2 Roaches is to reach the
positions of Reapers and try to defeat the Reapers. The Overseers
and the Reapers are randomly generated in the scenario, and
the enemy Roaches are randomly generated at other points.
Considering that only the Overseers can get information about
the location of enemies, the Roaches must learn to aggregate
the information of neighbor Overseers in order to win the battle
effectively.
2c3s5z scenario contains Colossus, Stalkers, and Zealots both
for ally agents and enemy agents. Ally agents must learn many
tactics, such as utilizing Zealots to intercept enemy Zealots in
order to protect Stalkers from serious damage. It is easier for
agents to learn such strategies and coordinate actions under
efﬁcient information interaction. In 8 m versus 9 m scenario,
both the ally and enemy agents are Marines.
MAgent: MAgent is a MARL platform that aims to support
the tasks that necessitate hundreds of agents. We select the Battle
scenario of MAgent to conduct experiments. The battle scenario
contains K ally agents and Z enemy agents. The target of ally
agents is to learn to defeat all enemy agents. Each agent can
take two actions: move or attack and the range of action is 4.
The individual enemy agent is more capable than an individual
ally agent, therefore the ally agent must develop strategies to
ﬁght cooperatively with other ally agents.
Since the Battle scenario tends to lose balance after the death
of agents, we stochastically add a new ally agent or enemy agent
to the scenario to keep balance. MAGI and other baselines are
ﬁrst trained under the same setting of K = 40 and Z = 24. In
the Battle scenario, an agent can acquire a positive reward of
+5 while attacking the enemy. An agent can obtain a negative
reward of -2 and -0.01, when it is killed by the enemy agent or
hits a blank grid, respectively.
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Texas at Arlington. Downloaded on June 27,2026 at 06:16:26 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

DING et al.: ROBUST MULTI-AGENT COMMUNICATION WITH GRAPH INFORMATION BOTTLENECK OPTIMIZATION
3103
TABLE I
SCENARIOS OF SMAC
Fig. 4.
Learning curves of different methods under adversarial attacks and
noise (η = 1.5).
B. Performance
Robustness (Q1, Q2): To verify whether MAGI and the
existing GNN-based MACRL methods are vulnerable to ad-
versarial attacks and noise perturbations, we produce random
perturbations and inject them into adjacency matrix A and the
agent features H. We add independent Gaussian noise to agent
features H with increasing amplitude. Concretely, we utilize
the average value of the maximum feature of each agent to be
the reference amplitude φ. Then we add Gaussian noise η · φ · ϵ
into each agent feature, where ϵ ∼N(0, 1), and η means the
feature noise ratio. We verify the robustness of MAGI and other
GNN-based MACRL methods with η = 1.5. In the ablation
section, we verify the robustness under different parameters with
η ∈{0.5, 1, 1.5}.
To produce adversarial attacks on the adjacency matrix A,
we ﬁrst try to randomly drop edges among agents with the
graph structure. Nevertheless, experimental results show that
this straightforward strategy can not signiﬁcantly affect the
communication efﬁciency of the GNN-based MACRL methods.
Thus, we utilize projected gradient descent (PGD) [29] to pro-
duce attacks rather than stochastically drop edges. Fig. 4 shows
the learning curves of MAGI and other GNN-based MACRL
methods on four scenarios of SMAC. The solid line shows the
mean win rate of the method without adversarial attack and noise
perturbations, and the corresponding shaded area means a 95%
conﬁdence interval. The dashed line illustrates the mean win rate
of the method with adversarial attacks and noise perturbations.
We can draw several conclusions from Fig. 4 as follows.
1) MAGI performs signiﬁcantly better than other baseline
TABLE II
PERFORMANCE OF DIFFERENT METHODS ON BATTLE SCENARIO
Fig. 5.
Illustration of representative behaviors of MAGI (right) and other
baselines (left) in Battle scenario.
methods in all scenarios. 2) By comparing QMIX and GNN-
based MACRL methods, we can see that the GNN-based com-
munication learning mechanism of these methods can indeed
facilitate cooperation among the agents and improve perfor-
mance. 3) Besides, without adversarial attack, by comparing
MAGI with other GNN-based MACRL methods (TarMAC and
MAGIC), MAGI performs better than other baselines, which
demonstrates the effectiveness of the proposed framework that
fuses the communication learning mechanism with the value
factorization method. 4) Furthermore, the performance of Tar-
MAC+A and MAGIC+A degrades signiﬁcantly compared with
TarMAC and MAGIC respectively, which demonstrate the other
existing GNN-based MACRL methods are susceptible to adver-
sarial attacks. 5) Compared with MAGI, MAGI+A shows only a
slight performance degradation, which demonstrates that MAGI
is robust under adversarial attacks because graph information
bottleneck optimization can improve the robustness of commu-
nication learning.
Effectiveness (Q3): The performance of different methods un-
der adversarial attacks in the Battle scenario is shown in Table II.
For convenience, in later experiments, methods without the
“+A” sufﬁx (such as MAGI) also default to that method under
adversarial attack. As shown in Table II, MAGI performs better
than other baselines, in terms of kill number (kill number of
enemy agents), kill-death rates (kill number of enemy agents
divided by death number of ally agents), and mean reward.
Fig. 5 illustrates the representative actions of agents trained
by different methods in the Battle scenario. As shown in Fig. 5,
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Texas at Arlington. Downloaded on June 27,2026 at 06:16:26 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

3104
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE, VOL. 46, NO. 5, MAY 2024
TABLE III
MEAN REWARD OF METHODS WITH DIFFERENT NUMBERS OF AGENTS
TABLE IV
WIN RATE WITH DIFFERENT VARIANTS ON SMAC
TABLE V
PERFORMANCE OF DIFFERENT VARIANTS ON BATTLE
with noise perturbations and adversarial attacks, MAGI-trained
agents learn some techniques of action coordination, such as
encircling. For the individual enemy agent, agents trained with
MAGI can learn to coordinate their actions to surround it and
defeat it. For the group of enemy agents, agents trained with
MAGI can learn the ability to coordinate attacks on one side of
the group.
In contrast, other GNN-based MACRL methods learn sub-
optimal strategies under adversarial attacks and noise perturba-
tions, such as gathering in a corner to avoid being attacked by
enemy agents. This behavior demonstrates the communication
learning of these methods becomes ineffective under perturba-
tions. This may be due to that MAGI adopts the graph informa-
tion bottleneck to learn robust and minimal sufﬁcient message
representations, which realize the efﬁcient communication that
promotes the action coordination and policy learning of agents.
Scalability (Q4): To verify that MAGI can be extended to
large-scale multi-agent scenarios, we compared MAGI and other
baselines under perturbations in the Battle scenario with the
different number of agents (K ∈{20, 30, 40, 50}). As shown
in Table III, the scalability ability of the MAGI is evidenced
by the fact that MAGI always performs best compared to the
baselines as the number of agents increases. We believe that this
combination of communication learning and value factorization
can be used as a general paradigm to solve large-scale multi-
agent problems.
C. Ablations
Contribution (Q5): Furthermore, we evaluate the contribu-
tions of each component of MAGI. The MAGI contains two crit-
ical components: the value decomposition (VD) component and
the IB optimization component. Thus, we design two variants
of MAGI: 1) MAGI-VD is MAGI without the VD component,
and 2) MAGI-IB is MAGI without the IB component. As shown
in Tables IV and V, by comparing MAGI and MAGI-IB, we
TABLE VI
WIN RATE WITH DIFFERENT REGULARIZERS ON SMAC
TABLE VII
WIN RATE WITH DIFFERENT REGULARIZERS ON BATTLE
TABLE VIII
WIN RATE WITH DIFFERENT VALUE DECOMPOSITION METHODS
can see that the removal of the IB component causes a drop
in performance under adversarial attacks and noise perturba-
tions. Moreover, when comparing MAGI and MAGI-VD, we
can see that the removal of the VD module also results in a
slight decline in performance. These experimental results show
that IB optimization can signiﬁcantly improve the robustness
and effectiveness of communication learning under adversarial
attacks and that the VD module can further facilitate action
coordination and policy learning.
To further evaluate the contributions of the two regularizers,
we use IBr1 = I(Y ; M L
H) to represent the IB loss of regularizer
1 and IBr2 = I(D; M L
H) to denote the IB loss of regularizer 2.
Therefore, MAGI w/ IBr1 represents MAGI only with regular-
izer 1, MAGI w/ IBr2 represents MAGI only with regularizer
2, MAGI-IB denotes MAGI without regularizers. As shown
in Tables VI and VII, both regularizers contribute to robust
communication. In scenario MMM2, 8 m versus 9 m and 1o2r
versus 4r, regularizer 1 is more effective than regularizer 2. In
other scenarios, regularizer 2 is more effective.
Flexibility (Q6): To demonstrate that MAGI can be ﬂexibly
fused with any value factorization methods, we conduct exper-
iments by integrating it with other popular value factorization
methods VDN and QPLEX. The fused methods MAGI (VDN)
and MAGI (QPLEX) are evaluated on various scenarios of
SMAC. As shown in Table VIII, MAGI (VDN) and MAGI
(QPLEX) perform better than the original value factorization
methods VDN and QMIX, which indicates the ﬂexibility of the
proposed method. Besides, the proposed method can remove
the value decomposition module for more general tasks, such as
mixed cooperative and competitive tasks.
Parameters (Q7): To explore the effect of different hyper-
parameters on performance. We ﬁrst conduct ablations on fea-
ture noise ratios in the 2c3s5z and MMM3 scenarios of SMAC.
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Texas at Arlington. Downloaded on June 27,2026 at 06:16:26 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

DING et al.: ROBUST MULTI-AGENT COMMUNICATION WITH GRAPH INFORMATION BOTTLENECK OPTIMIZATION
3105
Fig. 6.
Win rate with increasing feature noise ratio η.
TABLE IX
WIN RATE WITH DIFFERENT λ ON SMAC
Fig. 7.
Win rate of different variants with increasing feature noise ratio η.
As shown in Fig. 6, with different feature noise ratios (η ∈
{0.5, 1.0, 1.5}), MAGI consistently performs better than other
GNN-based MACRL methods. Especially, as the η is large
(η = 1.5), the performance of other methods is signiﬁcantly
affected, while MAGI remains stable, which demonstrates that
IB optimization of MAGI makes the communication learning
more robust under adversarial attacks and noise perturbations.
To evaluate the effect of different λ on the performance, we
conduct ablations on different scenarios of SMAC under adver-
sarial attacks and noise perturbations. As shown in Table IX,
with different λ (λ ∈{0.05, 0.10, 0.15}), MAGI achieve the
best performance with λ = 0.15 in MMM3 scenario and with
λ = 0.10 in other scenarios. Thus, for the sake of consistency,
we set the λ = 0.10 for all scenarios in SMAC.
Besides, we evaluate the robustness and effectiveness of
different variants with increasing feature noise ratio (η ∈
{1.5, 2.0, 2.5}). As shown in Fig. 7, from the comparison results
of the three variants, it can be seen that the performance of the
MAGI-IB drops sharply with the increase of the feature noise
ratio η. In contrast, the MAGI is excellent for stability. The effect
of MAGI is the best, the variance of MAGI-IB is the largest, and
meanwhile, the performance of MAGI-IB is the worst.
Generality (Q8): Adversarial attacks can be generally cat-
egorized as modifying features and modifying edges. There-
fore, in the previous experiment, we selected two adversarial
attacks (GN+PGD) to generate perturbations at the same time for
TABLE X
WIN RATE WITH DIFFERENT ADVERSARIAL ATTACKS ON MMM3
TABLE XI
FIXED HYPER-PARAMETERS OF MAGI FOR ALL ENVIRONMENTS
experiments: Adding Gaussian noise (modifying features) and
PGD [29] (modifying edges). Furthermore, we utilize two other
complicated adversarial attacks (IG-JSMA [28] and GUA [30])
for experiments to verify the generality of the proposed method,
and the results are shown in Table X. We utilize IG-JSMA [28]
to add adversarial perturbations on both the agent features and
edges. We leverage GUA [30] to change edges by ﬂipping the
connections between the anchor agents. Please refer to [28],
[29], [30] for more details. As shown in Table X, MAGI al-
ways achieves the best performance compared with other base-
line methods under various adversarial attack methods, which
demonstrates the generality of the proposed method.
D. Details of Model Hyper-Parameters
In this section, we provide the details about our experiment
settings for the convenience of reproducibility. Table XI de-
scribes the ﬁxed hyper-parameters of all the experiment bench-
marks.
V. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we introduce the graph information bottle-
neck optimization into the GNN-based MACRL method. The
proposed method achieves robust and efﬁcient communication
learning by two information-theoretic regularizers, which mini-
mizes the MI between the communication message and the agent
features and simultaneously maximizes the MI between the
message representation and the action selection. Experimental
results in various multi-agent scenarios demonstrate that the
proposed method signiﬁcantly outperforms other baselines and
can be ﬂexibly fused with existing value factorization methods
to promote action coordination.
To the best knowledge, this work is the ﬁrst attempt at learning
robust communication via graph information bottleneck opti-
mization in the MACRL domain. We believe it is a promising
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Texas at Arlington. Downloaded on June 27,2026 at 06:16:26 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

3106
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE, VOL. 46, NO. 5, MAY 2024
way to establish efﬁcient communication of large-scale multi-
agent systems under adversarial attacks and noise perturbations.
In the future, it is worthwhile to apply the proposed method to
real-world large-scale multi-agent systems. It is important to
acknowledge that our current method is speciﬁcally designed
for discrete action and fully cooperative scenarios. It is not ap-
plicabletocontinuousactionenvironmentsormixedcompetitive
cooperative scenarios. However, our future work aims to develop
a more versatile and robust communication model that can be
adapted to a broader range of scenarios.
REFERENCES
[1] H. Li, Q. Zhang, and D. Zhao, “Deep reinforcement learning-based auto-
matic exploration for navigation in unknown environment,” IEEE Trans.
Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 31, no. 6, pp. 2064–2076, Jun. 2020.
[2] N. Wang, Y. Gao, H. Zhao, and C. K. Ahn, “Reinforcement learning-based
optimal tracking control of an unknown unmanned surface vehicle,” IEEE
Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 32, no. 7, pp. 3034–3045, Jul. 2021.
[3] C. Sun, W. Liu, and L. Dong, “Reinforcement learning with task decom-
position for cooperative multiagent systems,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw.
Learn. Syst., vol. 32, no. 5, pp. 2054–2065, May 2021.
[4] T. T. Nguyen, N. D. Nguyen, and S. Nahavandi, “Deep reinforcement
learning for multiagent systems: A review of challenges, solutions, and ap-
plications,” IEEE Trans. Cybern., vol. 50, no. 9, pp. 3826–3839, Sep. 2020.
[5] W. Du and S. Ding, “A survey on multi-agent deep reinforcement learning:
From the perspective of challenges and applications,” Artif. Intell. Rev.,
vol. 54, no. 5, pp. 3215–3238, 2021.
[6] K. Son, D. Kim, W. J. Kang, D. Hostallero, and Y. Yi, “Learning to
factorize with transformation for cooperative multi-agent reinforcement
learning,” in Proc. 36th Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., Long Beach, CA, USA,
2019, pp. 5887–5896.
[7] P. Sunehag et al., “Value-decomposition networks for cooperative multi-
agent learning,” in Proc. 19th Int. Conf. Auton. Agents Multiagent Syst.,
Auckland, New Zealand, 2020, pp. 2085–2087.
[8] T. Rashid, M. Samvelyan, C. Schroeder, G. Farquhar, J. Foerster, and
S. Whiteson, “QMIX: Monotonic value function factorisation for deep
multi-agent reinforcement learning,” in Proc. 35th Int. Conf. Mach. Learn.,
Stockholm, Sweden, 2018, pp. 4295–4304.
[9] J. Wang, Z. Ren, T. Liu, Y. Yu, and C. Zhang, “QPLEX: Duplex dueling
multi-agent Q-learning,” in Proc. 7th Int. Conf. Learn. Representations,
2019, pp. 1–27.
[10] S. Sukhbaatar and R. Fergus, “Learning multiagent communication with
backpropagation,” in Proc. 30th Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., Barcelona,
Spain, 2016, pp. 2244–2252.
[11] T. Wang, J. Wang, C. Zheng, and C. Zhang, “Learning nearly decom-
posable value functions via communication minimization,” 2019, arXiv:
1910.05366.
[12] C. Guan et al., “Efﬁcient multi-agent communication via self-supervised
information aggregation,” in Proc. 36th Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst.,
2022, pp. 1020–1033.
[13] J. Jiang and Z. Lu, “Learning attentional communication for multi-agent
cooperation,” in Proc. 32nd Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., Montreal,
Canada, 2018, pp. 7254–7264.
[14] R. Wang, X. He, R. Yu, W. Qiu, B. An, and Z. Rabinovich, “Learning efﬁ-
cient multi-agent communication: An information bottleneck approach,”
in Proc. 37th Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2020, pp. 9908–9918.
[15] Y. Niu, R. Paleja, and M. C. Gombolay, “Multi-agent graph-attention
communication and teaming,” in Proc. 20th Int. Conf. Auton. Agents
Multiagent Syst., London, U.K., 2021, pp. 964–973.
[16] A. Das et al., “TarMAC: Targeted multi-agent communication,” in
Proc. 36th Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., Long Beach, CA, USA, 2019,
pp. 1538–1546.
[17] W. Zhou, D. Chen, J. Yan, Z. Li, H. Yin, and W. Ge, “Multi-agent
reinforcement learning for cooperative lane changing of connected and
autonomous vehicles in mixed trafﬁc,” Auton. Intell. Syst., vol. 2, no. 5,
pp. 1–11, 2022.
[18] N.TishbyandN.Zaslavsky,“Deeplearningandtheinformationbottleneck
principle,” in Proc. IEEE Inf. Theory Workshop, 2015, pp. 1–5.
[19] T. Wu, H. Ren, P. Li, and J. Leskovec, “Graph information bottleneck,” in
Proc. 34th Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2020, pp. 20437–20448.
[20] M. Samvelyan et al., “The StarCraft multi-agent challenge,” in Proc.
18th Int. Conf. Auton. Agents Multiagent Syst., Montreal, Canada, 2019,
pp. 2186–2188.
[21] L. Zheng, J. Yang, H. Cai, M. Zhou, W. Zhang, and Y. Jun, “MAgent:
A many-agent reinforcement learning platform for artiﬁcial collective
intelligence,” in Proc. 32nd AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2018, pp. 8222–8223.
[22] J. Jiang, C. Dun, and Z. Lu, “Graph convolutional reinforcement learning
for multi-agent cooperation,” in Proc. 6th Int. Conf. Learn. Representa-
tions, 2018, pp. 1–10.
[23] T. Wang, R. Liao, J. Ba, and S. Fidler, “NerveNet: Learning structured
policy with graph neural networks,” in Proc. 6th Int. Conf. Learn. Repre-
sentations, Vancouver, Canada, 2018, pp. 1–26.
[24] H. Ryu, H. Shin, and J. Park, “Multi-agent actor-critic with hierarchical
graph attention network,” in Proc. 34th AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., New York,
USA, 2020, pp. 7236–7243.
[25] Y. Liu, W. Wang, Y. Hu, J. Hao, X. Chen, and Y. Gao, “Multi-agent game
abstraction via graph attention neural network,” in Proc. 34th AAAI Conf.
Artif. Intell., New York, USA, 2020, pp. 7211–7218.
[26] M. Zhang, X. Wang, M. Zhu, X. Shi, Z. Zhang, and J. Zhou, “Robust
heterogeneous graph neural networks against adversarial attacks,” in Proc.
36th AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2022, pp. 4363–4370.
[27] J. Ma, S. Ding, and Q. Mei, “Towards more practical adversarial attacks
on graph neural networks,” 2020, arXiv: 2006.05057.
[28] H. Wu, C. Wang, Y. Tyshetskiy, A. Docherty, K. Lu, and L. Zhu, “Adver-
sarial examples for graph data: Deep insights into attack and defense,” in
Proc. 28th Int. Joint Conf. Artif. Intell., 2019, pp. 4816–4823.
[29] K. Xu et al., “Topology attack and defense for graph neural networks: An
optimization perspective,” 2019, arXiv: 1906.04214.
[30] X.Zang,Y.Xie,J.Chen,andB.Yuan,“Graphuniversaladversarialattacks:
A few bad actors ruin graph learning models,” in Proc. 30th Int. Joint Conf.
Artif. Intell., 2021, pp. 1–7.
[31] H. Zhang et al., “Robust deep reinforcement learning against adversarial
perturbations on state observations,” in Proc. 34th Adv. Neural Inf. Process.
Syst., Vancouver, Canada, 2020, pp. 21024–21037.
[32] T. James, W. Tsunhsuan, M. Sivabalan, R. Mengye, and U. Raquel,
“Adversarial attacks on multi-agent communication,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF
18th Int. Conf. Comput. Vis., Montreal, Canada, 2021, pp. 7768–7777.
[33] M. Rupert, B. Jan, and P. Amanda, “Gaussian process based message
ﬁltering for robust multi-agent cooperation in the presence of adversarial
communication,” 2020, arXiv: 2012.00508.
[34] W. Xue, W. Qiu, B. An, Z. Rabinovich, S. Obraztsova, and C. Yeo, “Mis-
spoke or mis-lead: Achieving robustness in multi-agent communicative
reinforcement learning,” 2021, arXiv:2108.03803.
[35] Y. Sun et al., “Certiﬁably robust policy learning against adversarial multi-
agent communication,” in Proc. 11th Int. Conf. Learn. Representations,
2022, pp. 1–30.
[36] P. Veliˇckovi´c, G. Cucurull, and A. Casanova, “Graph attention networks,”
in Proc. 6th Int. Conf. Learn. Representations, Vancouver, Canada, 2018,
pp. 1–12.
Shifei Ding (Member, IEEE) received the PhD degree
from the Shandong University of Science and Tech-
nology, Qingdao, China, in 2004, and the postdoctoral
degree from the Key Laboratory of Intelligent Infor-
mationProcessing(IIP),InstituteofComputingTech-
nology (ICT), Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS),
Beijing, China, in 2006. He is a professor and PhD
supervisor with the China University of Mining and
Technology. His research interests include intelligent
information processing, pattern recognition, machine
learning, data mining, and granular computing.
Wei Du received the BS degree from Shandong Uni-
versity, Jinan, China, in 2016, and the MS degree
from the China University of Mining and Technology,
Xuzhou, China, in 2020. He is currently working
toward the PhD degree with the China University of
Mining and Technology, his supervisor is Prof. Shifei
Ding. His research interests include machine learning
and reinforcement learning.
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Texas at Arlington. Downloaded on June 27,2026 at 06:16:26 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

DING et al.: ROBUST MULTI-AGENT COMMUNICATION WITH GRAPH INFORMATION BOTTLENECK OPTIMIZATION
3107
Ling Ding received the BS and MS degrees from
the Asia Paciﬁc University of Technology and Inno-
vation, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia, in 2017 and 2019,
respectively. She is currently working toward the PhD
degree with Tianjin University, her supervisor is Dr.
Di Jin. Her research interests include deep learning,
graph machine learning, clustering, etc.
Jian Zhang received the PhD degree from the
ChinaUniversity of Mining and Technology,Xuzhou,
China, in 2019. He is a lecturer with the China
University of Mining and Technology. His research
interests include deep learning, structure design and
optimization of neuralnetworks,and image synthesis.
Lili Guo (Member, IEEE) received the PhD degree
from Tianjin University, Tianjin, China, in 2020. She
is a lecturer with the China University of Mining
and Technology. Her research interests include deep
learning, multimodal emotional computing, etc.
Bo An (Member, IEEE) received the PhD degree
in computer science from the University of Mas-
sachusetts, Amherst, MA, USA, in 2010. He is an
associate professor with Nanyang Technological Uni-
versity and chairman of the president’s Committee.
His research interests include artiﬁcial intelligence,
multi-agent systems, reinforcement learning, game
theory, and optimization.
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Texas at Arlington. Downloaded on June 27,2026 at 06:16:26 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
