1
DCT-MARL: A Dynamic Communication Topology
Based MARL Algorithm for Platoon Control
Yaqi Xu, Yan ShiB, Jin Tian, Graduate Student Member, IEEE, Fanzeng Xia,
Tongxin Li, Member, IEEE, Shanzhi Chen, Fellow, IEEE, Yuming Ge
Abstract—With the rapid advancement of vehicular communi-
cation facilities and autonomous driving technologies, connected
vehicle platooning has emerged as a promising approach to
improve traffic efficiency and driving safety. Reliable Vehicle-
to-Vehicle (V2V) communication is critical to achieving efficient
cooperative control. However, in the real-world traffic environ-
ment, V2V communication may suffer from time-varying delay
and packet loss, leading to degraded control performance and
even safety risks. To mitigate the adverse effects of non-ideal
communication, this paper proposes a Dynamic Communication
Topology based Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning (DCT-
MARL) algorithm for robust cooperative platoon control. Specif-
ically, the state space is augmented with historical control action
and delay to enhance robustness against communication delay.
To mitigate the impact of packet loss, a multi-key gated com-
munication mechanism is introduced, which dynamically adjusts
the communication topology based on the correlation between
vehicles and their current communication status. Simulation
results demonstrate that the proposed DCT-MARL significantly
outperforms state-of-the-art methods in terms of string stability
and driving comfort, validating its superior robustness and
effectiveness.
Index Terms—Connected Vehicle Platoon, Dynamic Commu-
nication Topology, Delay Compensation, Multi-Agent Reinforce-
ment Learning.
I. INTRODUCTION
In recent years, with the rapid deployment of Vehicle-
to-Vehicle (V2V) communication facilities and autonomous
driving technologies, connected vehicle platooning has be-
come a promising approach for enhancing road safety and
traffic efficiency [1]. Through V2V communication, connected
vehicles can form self-organized platoons and maintain a
short inter-vehicle distance and coordinated driving behavior,
thereby improving road throughput while reducing energy
consumption and emissions [2].
In such platooning systems, the effectiveness of cooperative
control critically depends on the real-time sharing of vehicle
driving state information (e.g., position, velocity, accelera-
tion, etc.). Consequently, reliable V2V communication is an
essential prerequisite for ensuring control performance [3].
Yaqi Xu, Yan Shi, and Jin Tian are with State Key Laboratory of
Networking and Switching Technology, Beijing University of Posts and
Telecommunications, Beijing 100876, China (e-mail: xuyq19@bupt.edu.cn;
shiyan@bupt.edu.cn). Fanzeng Xia and Tongxin Li are with the Chinese
University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen, China. Shanzhi Chen is with the National
Engineering Research Center of Mobile Communications and Vehicular
Networks, and State Key Laboratory of Wireless Mobile Communications,
China Academy of Telecommunication Technology, Beijing, China. Yuming
Ge is with the Key Laboratory of Internet of Vehicle Technical Innovation and
Testing, Ministry of Industry and Information Technology, Beijing, China.
However, in the real-world traffic environment, channel fading,
signal obstruction, and spectral interference may induce sub-
stantial communication quality variations, resulting in time-
varying delay and packet loss.
These imperfections not only hinder timely and accurate in-
formation exchange, as delay leads to outdated data and packet
loss results in missing information, but also directly affect the
string stability and driving comfort of the platooning system
[4]. Hence, developing robust platoon control strategies under
non-ideal communication conditions has become a pressing
research challenge.
To address these issues, a range of delay compensation
based robust control strategies have been proposed. Some
studies model deterministic or random delays to improve
the robustness of control algorithms [5], [6]. More recently,
researchers have also explored solutions within the Reinforce-
ment Learning (RL) framework by expanding the agent’s state
space to include historical control actions [7], [8], which im-
proves the system’s robustness under delayed communication.
Nevertheless, these methods largely rely on simplified delay
assumptions and lack explicit sensitivity to the time-varying
nature of delay, limiting their scalability to highly dynamic
communication environments.
For packet loss, mitigation strategies typically rely on
holding previous inputs, interpolating historical data, or fall-
back modes [9]–[14]. Although these methods can maintain
basic control performance under mild packet loss, they often
fail to guarantee stability and safety in high-loss or highly
dynamic environments. Some recent studies have introduced
dynamic communication topology mechanisms that adjust
weights based on communication quality, aiming to mitigate
performance degradation [15], [16]. While this mitigates the
performance degradation from communication packet loss,
these strategies focus solely on communication quality metrics
and overlook the need to consider the relevance of commu-
nication vehicles in the current dynamic traffic environment.
In reality, the relevance of each neighboring vehicle is dy-
namically determined. For example, during acceleration, a
driver’s attention naturally shifts to the vehicle ahead, as its
motion governs the feasibility of speeding up, whereas during
deceleration, the vehicle behind becomes more relevant, since
its timely response is critical for avoiding rear-end collisions
[17].
Moreover, most existing studies typically address either
communication delay or packet loss in isolation, lacking
a unified control framework that considers their coupled
impact. Although some traditional optimization-based works
arXiv:2508.12633v2  [eess.SY]  21 Aug 2025

2
have proposed integrated modeling approaches [18]–[20], they
typically rely on accurate system models and analytical formu-
lations, which limits their adaptability and generalization under
real-world uncertainties and unmodeled dynamics. Therefore,
it’s necessary to investigate novel intelligent algorithms to
solve the adaptability problem in dynamic and complex traffic
scenarios.
In contrast, Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning (MARL),
has recently emerged as a promising solution for cooperative
platoon control due to its model-free nature, strong gen-
eralization capabilities, and support for distributed decision
making [21]–[23]. Under assumptions of ideal communication
or deterministic delay, previous studies have validated MARL’s
efficacy in platoon control [24], [25]. Some methods further
enhance MARL by introducing communication-aware designs,
that though consider inter-agent information correlations to
build dynamic communication topologies [26]. However, these
approaches tend to focus on correlation among agents, while
overlooking the dynamic of communication quality.
To bridge this gap, this paper proposes a novel Dynamic
Communication Topology based Multi-Agent Reinforcement
Learning (DCT-MARL) algorithm to enhance the control
performance of connected vehicle platoon under non-ideal
communication condition. By dynamically adjusting the com-
munication topology and augmenting the state space, the
proposed method improves the robustness and adaptability of
vehicle platoon in realistic communication environment. The
main contributions are summarized as follows:
1) A multi-key gated communication network is proposed,
enabling each agent to infer the relevance of communica-
tion agents based on real-time observations and historical
contexts. This mechanism dynamically adjusts the com-
munication topology in response to packet loss.
2) A state enhancement scheme is designed to mitigate
the impact of communication delay on platoon control.
Specifically, the agent’s state is extended to include both
the history control action and delay information. This
increase improves the policy sensitivity to time-varying
communication delay and improves the robustness and
adaptability of the system to delayed communication.
3) A co-simulation environment integrating vehicular con-
trol and wireless communication is developed to enable
comprehensive evaluation under realistic condition. Ex-
tensive experiments demonstrate that the proposed DCT-
MARL algorithm outperforms state-of-the-art methods in
terms of string stability and driving comfort under non-
ideal communication condition.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: Section
II introduced related work on platoon control under non-ideal
communication scenarios, as well as MARL-based control
approaches. Section III formulates the problem. The details
on proposed DCT-MARL based control method is discussed
in Section IV. Section V presents the experimental setting
and Section VI discusses the experimental results. Finally, the
conclusions and future works are given in Section VII.
II. RELATED WORK
A. Platoon Control under Unideal Communication Conditions
Reliable V2V communication is essential for cooperative
platoon control, however, packet loss and delay in practical
V2V communication may induce performance degradation in
the control system [3], [4].
To mitigate the negative impact of communication delay, a
range of delay compensation based robust control strategies
have been proposed [5]–[8], [27]. To address packet loss,
traditional approaches employ techniques include Zero-Order
Hold (ZOH) to maintain previous control inputs [9], historical
data interpolation [10], [11], or fallback modes such as Adap-
tive Cruise Control (ACC) [12]–[14]. To enhance adaptability,
some recent studies have introduced dynamic communication
topology mechanisms that adjust weights based on communi-
cation quality, thereby mitigating the effects of communication
packet loss [15], [16]. For example, Liu et al. [15] developed
an traditional optimization-based method to adjust weights
according to communication condition, whereas Wang et al.
[16] proposed a self-adaptive topology control method based
on a Dual-Decision Deterministic Policy Gradient (D3PG)
algorithm for platoon control, which significantly enhances
system resilience under fluctuating communication condition.
However, these strategies primarily focus on communication
quality metrics, overlooking the fact that in practical appli-
cations, the selection of communication targets should be
context-aware and responsive to dynamic traffic conditions.
Furthermore, most existing studies address either delay or
packet loss in isolation, making them insufficient for scenarios
where both impairments coexist. In real-world environments,
however, delay and packet loss frequently occur simultane-
ously, creating compounded challenges for platoon control
systems. To address this, some recent studies have proposed
unified models that simultaneously account for the effects
of delay and packet loss [5], [9], [18]–[20]. For instance,
Vegamoor et al. [18] modeled delay and packet loss simulta-
neously, and introduced a safety-aware constraint on distance
errors between any two vehicles and derived a lower bound
on safe time gaps to ensure string stability under unideal
communication scenarios. Zhao et al. [5] examined control
strategies under constant time headway distance, modeling
non-ideal communication conditions including limited com-
munication range, random packet loss, and time-varying delay.
Their approach employed a distance-based dynamic topology
and a robust controller that utilized multi-leader an follower
information. Following this, Wang et al. [20] further advanced
the approach by proposing a platoon following model based on
dynamic weight optimization, which adaptively adjusted the
weighting of incoming information. Their approach integrated
realistic vehicle dynamics and demonstrated strong robustness
under non-ideal communication conditions.
While these control approaches provide valuable theoreti-
cal foundations, they often rely heavily on accurate system
modeling and incur significant computational overhead. Con-
sequently, they are difficult to scale in dynamic and uncertain
traffic environment characterized by rapidly changing veloci-
ties and nonlinear interactions.

3
B. MARL-based Platoon Control
In recent years, MARL has gained significant attention
in intelligent transportation systems due to its strengths in
distributed decision-making, policy learning, and environmen-
tal adaptability [24], [25], [28], [29]. MARL has become a
promising paradigm for cooperative control tasks, such as
vehicle platooning. For example, Chen et al. [28] evaluated
MARL frameworks using both local and global reward struc-
tures in platoons of three and five vehicles, and found that
decentralized learning with local rewards achieved superior
performance in terms of stability and responsiveness compared
to centralized approaches.
However, the vast majority of existing MARL-based platoon
control studies assume ideal V2V communication, free of
delay and packet loss, and thus lack a comprehensive eval-
uation into the robustness of learned policies under realistic
communication impairments. To address this gap, Wang et al.
[25] proposed a delay-aware MARL framework based on a
partially observable Markov game (POMG), capturing delay-
induced uncertainties in platoon systems. Their simulations
demonstrated improved platoon stability under time-varying
delays. However, existing works still fall short of simultane-
ously addressing communication delays and packet losses in
a unified MARL framework.
On dynamic communication topologies within MARL, re-
searchers have explored inter-agent information correlations
to construct adaptive communication topologies. Seminal al-
gorithms including ITGCNet [30], Gated-ACML [31], I2C
[26], and NeurComm [32] employ gating or attention mech-
anisms to determine when and with whom to communicate,
thereby improving learning efficiency. In particular, Chu et
al. [32] proposed a learnable protocol that enables agents
to formulate distributed policies based on both local and
neighbor information, partially mitigating the adverse effects
of communication failure. Ding et al. [26] propose I2C, a
dynamic communication framework where each agent learns
to infer its communication targets from local observations via a
prior network trained through causal inference. However, these
methods primarily emphasize interagent information relevance
while neglecting the dynamic variability of the communica-
tion environment, limiting their applicability under real-world
communication environment.
To overcome these limitations, this paper proposes a DCT-
MARL framework that jointly addresses communication delay
and packet loss. The framework aims to substantially enhance
the robustness and adaptability of connected vehicle platoon
in non-ideal communication environment.
III. PROBLEM FORMULATION
A. Vehicle Dynamics Model
This paper considers a platoon consisting of N +1 vehicles,
indexed as 0, 1, . . . , n, where the leading vehicle is indexed as
0, and the following vehicles are indexed from 1 to n. All
vehicles communicate through V2V wireless communication
to exchange information and coordinate movements. In this
study, this paper primarily focus on a linear model of a
connected automated vehicle (CAV) system, which has been
extensively used in vehicle control. The vehicle dynamics are
given by [33].
pi,t+1 = pi,t + ∆t ∗vi,t
vi,t+1 = vi,t + ∆t ∗acci,t
acci,t+1 =

1 −∆t
τi

acci,t + T
τi
∗ui,t,
(1)
where pi,t+1, vi,t+1 and acci,t+1 represents the position, ve-
locity, and acceleration of vehicle i at time step t + 1, respec-
tively. The ∆t is the sampling time. The term ui,tdenotes the
control input (i.e., commanded acceleration), and τi is a time
constant representing driveline dynamics, describing how the
acceleration responds to the control input.
In this study, this paper adopt the constant time headway
policy (CTHP), meaning that the platoon maintains a constant
time gap between adjacent vehicles. Each following vehicle
i aims to maintain a desired headway distance from its
preceding vehicle i −1, which is defined as the bumper-
to-bumper distance. The ideal inter-vehicle distance between
vehicle i and its predecessor i −1 is denoted as dr,i,t.
dr,i,t = d0 + h ∗vi,t,
(2)
where h > 0 is the constant time headway, and d0 is
the standstill distance that ensures safety when vehicles are
stopped. The actual inter-vehicle distance between vehicle i
and vehicle i −1 is given by di,t = pi−1,t −pi,t −l, where l
is the vehicle length. The distance error for vehicle i is then
computed as:
errpi,t = di,t −dr,i,t = pj,t −pi,t −l −d0 −h ∗vi,t.
(3)
Since all vehicles in the platoon are assumed to be identical,
d0 and l are considered uniform across all vehicles and are
therefore omitted in the subsequent derivations.
For any adjacent vehicle pair (i, j) in the communication
graph, the tracking error consists of both distance error and
velocity error, defined as follows:
errpi,t =
(
pj,t −pi,t −Pi
µ=j+1 h · vµ,t,
i > j
pi,t −pj,t −Pj
µ=i+1 h · vµ,t,
j > i
errvi,t =
(
vj,t −vi,t,
i > j
vi,t −vj,t,
j > i
(4)
Here, j < i means vehicle j is ahead of vehicle i. The distance
error errp,i,t captures the deviation between the actual distance
of vehicles i and j and the cumulative desired distance,
which is obtained by summing the product of the desired time
headway h and the instantaneous velocities of all intermediate
vehicles between i and j. The velocity error errv,i,t reflects
the relative speed difference between the two vehicles.
Each vehicle i is capable of communicating with other
vehicles within its communication range. However, due to po-
tential communication disruptions or packet loss, the commu-
nication agent may become unavailable at certain time steps.
Additionally, due to network congestion, signal attenuation,
or interference, communication may experience a delay ξi,j,
meaning that vehicle i at time t receives information from
vehicle j that corresponds to time t −ξi,j instead of real-time
data.

4
B. Control Objectives of Vehicle Platoon
The primary control objective of the connected vehicle
platoon is to minimize the deviation of each follower vehicle
from its desired relative position and velocity with respect to
its preceding vehicles even under non-ideal V2V communica-
tion conditions including delay and packet loss. Specifically,
the system aims to minimize both the inter-vehicle distance
error and the velocity control error, thereby ensuring safe,
stable, and efficient following behavior under communication
constraints.
Considering the vehicle dynamics described in Eq. 4, the
control objective is to minimize the cumulative tracking error
over a finite time horizon T:
min
ui,t
T
X
t=0
N
X
i=1
erri,t,
(5)
where the instantaneous tracking error for vehicle i at time
t is defined as:
erri,t = λp∥epi,t∥2 + λv∥evi,t∥2,
(6)
and λp and λv are weighting coefficients that determine the
relative importance of position and velocity tracking errors.
These coefficients are typically set to equal values unless a
specific prioritization is needed.
In addition, each vehicle’s behavior must satisfy physical
and safety-related constraints:
accmin ≤acci,t ≤accmax,
(7)
where acci,t is the actual acceleration of vehicle i. The bounds
accmin and accmax represent the allowable acceleration
range, while umin and umax denote the bounds on control
input. These constraint ensure safe and comfortable driving
and prevent excessive control efforts.
IV. DCT-MARL BASED ALGORITHM
In this section, the proposed DCT-MARL algorithm is
described, as shown in Figure.1. The platoon control task
is then formulated as a Decentralized Partially Observable
Markov Decision Process (Dec-POMDP). To ensure robust
control performance under non-ideal communication condi-
tions, the framework integrates two key mechanisms: (i)
a dynamic communication topology that adaptively selects
communication partners, and (ii) an explicit delay module that
augments the state and reward design to account for time-
varying transmission latency.
The DCT-MARL algorithm is built upon the actor-critic ar-
chitecture. Each actor consists of a multi-key gated communi-
cation network, which dynamically selects relevant neighbors
based on inference mechanisms, and an action policy network
that outputs control actions. At each control step, every agent
gathers state information from vehicles within its communi-
cation range. Considering the possibility of communication
failures, the agent adaptively determines its communication
topology based on local observations, integrating self-state and
received information for decision-making.
This design is well aligned with real-world vehicle platoon
systems, where the communication topology is frequently
affected by wireless interference, signal blocking, and vehicle
mobility. The dynamic topology selection mechanism allows
each vehicle to adaptively adjust its communication partners,
ensuring that critical information is exchanged even under non-
ideal communication conditions.
The centralized critic aggregates joint actions and state
representations from all agents to estimate each agent’s ac-
tionvalue function at each time step. An attention mechanism
is utilized to extract relevant information from other agents’
observation-action pairs, enabling each agent to selectively
filter critical environmental information. The critic network
is trained via temporal difference learning [34] and is only
used during training, enabling decentralized execution once
the actors are deployed.
To optimize each agent i’s policy πi, this paper minimizes
the Kullback–Leibler (KL) divergence between the learned
distribution qθi and the target distribution p:
−DKL(qθi ∥p) =
X
t
Est,ut,At∼qθi
h
ri(st, ut) + H
 πi(ui | oi(s, A))
· ρ(At | st)
i
.
(8)
Beyond the reward term, the objective introduces an ad-
ditional conditional entropy term for the joint distribution
πi(ai | o(st, At)) ρ(At | st), which encourages exploration
for agent i and enhances the graph policy ρ. The adjacency
trajectory matrices for the dynamic directed graph and its
subgraphs are denoted as A and will be further detailed in
the following section. The objective function for agent i is
thus redefined as:
Jπi(θi) = Eqθi [Q(s, u) + H (πi(ui|oi(s, A))ρ(A|s))] .
(9)
The policy πi is updated by maximizing Jπi, and its gradient
is:
∇θiJ(θi) = Eqθi
h
∇θi log πi(ui | oi(s, A))·
(−α log πθi(ui | oi(s, A)) + Qi(s, u))
i
.
(10)
The critic network Qi is trained by minimizing the
temporal-difference loss:
LQ(ϕ) = E(st,ut)∼D

(yi
t −Qi(st, ut; ϕ))2
,
(11)
where the TD target is:
yi
t = ri(st, ut) + Qi(st+1, ui
t+1, u−i
t+1; ϕ).
(12)
During training, this paper follow these iterative procedures:
• First, fix πi(ui|s, A) and Qi(s, u) to update ρ(A).
• Then, improve πi(ui|o(s, A)) and Qi(s, u, A) using the
generated trajectories given A.

5
Vehicle Platoon Environment
Actors Cluster
Actor 1
Actor 2
Actor i
…
Actor n
…
Communication 
Network
Action Policy 
Network
Relevance Score
dj
dk
dl
Ot
i
Inference Network
di
Multi Key Gated Network
Calculate 
Weights
Embedding
At
i
ut
1
ut
2
ut
i
ut
n
ot
1
rt
1
ot
2
rt
2
ot
i
rt
i
ot
n
rt
n
Critic
Multi-Head 
Attention
Add
Norm
Feed
Forward
Add
Norm
e1
e2
e3
N
Concatenate
All Heads
Linear
(St , ut , rt)
Qt
Fig. 1. The architecture of DCT-MARL based Platoon Control algorithm.
The prior network, parameterized by θbi, is trained as a
binary classifier using the training dataset S and is updated
with the following loss function:
L(θbi) = E(oi,dj),Ij
i ∼S
h
−(1 −yj
i ) log (1 −bi(oi, dj))
+ yj
i log (bi(oi, dj))
i
,
(13)
where
the
binary
label
defined
as:
yi
=
(
1,
if Pω(yi | oi) ≥δ
0,
otherwise,
where δ is a tunable hyperparameter
controlling the confidence threshold for classification. Notably,
if a certain agent significantly impacts another agent’s state
estimation during centralized training, its information must
remain accessible during decentralized execution. To achieve
this, the dynamic communication topology learned in training
is retained for execution, enabling consistent and robust
coordination.
A. Dec-POMDP Formulation
A
Dec-POMDP
is
formally
defined
as
a
tuple
⟨N, S, U, P, R, O, γ⟩,
where
N
=
1, . . . , n
denotes
a
finite set of n agents interacting in a shared environment. The
environment is characterized by a global state space S, and
each agent selects actions from a joint action space U. The
environment dynamics are governed by the state transition
function P : S × U →S, which defines the probability
distribution over subsequent states given the current state
and joint actions. Each agent receives observations from an
observation space O, which may provide only partial and
possibly noisy information about the true state. The reward
function R : S × U →R maps the current state and joint
actions to a scalar reward shared among all agents. Finally,
γ ∈[0, 1) is the discount factor that determines the present
value of future rewards.
At each time step t, each agent i ∈N receives an
observation from the state and follows an individual policy
πi, where πi depends on the agent’s observation-action history.
The joint action of all agents leads to the next state, and the
team receives a global reward. Each agent aims to maximize
the accumulated reward.
State Space S: To mitigate the performance degradation
caused by communication delays, this paper extend the defini-
tion of the agent’s state space by incorporating both historical
control information and delay descriptors. Specifically, at time
step t, the state of vehicle i is defined as:
Si,t = {pi,t, vi,t, acci,t, ut−1, ξi,t} ,
(14)
where pi,t, vi,t, and acci,t denote the vehicle’s current position,
velocity, and acceleration, respectively; ut−1 represents the
most recent control input, and ξi,t denotes the communication
delay associated with the latest received information.
Although this formulation deviates from the conventional
state definition, it is a rational extension under communication-
impaired environments, where both the delayed control input
and latency should be explicitly considered in the state repre-
sentation. In connected vehicle systems, time-varying wireless
communication often causes neighboring information to arrive
with variable delays. If the control policy relies solely on such
delayed observations, the Markov property may be compro-
mised, thereby impairing decision-making performance.

6
By incorporating the previous control action ut−1, the
agent can better infer the underlying system dynamics dur-
ing periods of delayed or missing observations. Additionally,
explicitly modeling the delay ξi,t enables the policy to as-
sess the reliability of received data and adjust its decisions
accordingly. Upon receiving information from neighboring
agents, the agent estimates the communication delay using
the attached timestamps and incorporates this value into its
current state. This augmented state representation preserves
the Markovian assumption under delayed observations and
significantly enhances decision-making robustness in non-ideal
communication environments.
Observation Space O: Agents use communication to ob-
tain information beyond their direct observations to assist
decision-making. Each agent’s local observation oi ∈Si
is a partial description of the environment state. At time
step t, each agent j in the platoon transmits its driving
informationXj,t = pj,t, vj,t, accj,t, tj,t, neighboring agent i
obtains driving information from multiple vehicles within its
V2V communication range, forming its partial observation
oi and determining which agents are within communication
range. This solves the problem of possible communication
failures. For example, if agent l fails within the current control
interval k, agent i cannot observe agent l’s information through
V2V communication, and can receive the status information of
other related vehicles for control output. It avoids the problem
that the amount of states received may be insufficient due to
communication failures. The global state O is then defined
as the combination of all agents’ local observations:O =
{o1, o2, . . . , on}. Similarly, the global state S is defined as:
S = {s1, s2, . . . , sn}.
Action Space U: Each agent i follows a decentralized policy
πi : Oi × Si →[0, 1], to determine the control output at time
step t. Each PC agent i selects a control input as its PC action
at time step t.
Reward Function R: The reward function ri,t is critical
for training RL agents to exhibit the desired behavior. Our
objective is to train agents to ensure platoon stability and
comfort under imperfect communication and dynamic traffic
conditions. The reward assigned to agent i at each time step
t is designed as follows:
ri,k = −

ω1 (errpi,k) + ω2 (errvi,k) + ω3 (jerki)
(15)
+ ω4 · ReLU (dsafe −di,k)
	
,
(16)
where w1, w2, w3, and w4 are the weighting coefficients.
In this equation, the first two terms penalize deviations from
ideal position and velocity, encouraging agents to achieve these
goals closely and guaranteeing the stability of the platoon.
The third term is to improve driving comfort to minimize
sudden acceleration, thereby providing a smoother and more
comfortable ride for passengers. Where jerk is the rate of
change of acceleration, which is given by
jerki = −
˙
acc2
i (t)
h
(umax−umin)
∆t
i2 .
(17)
The fourth item acts as a safety constraint, severely penaliz-
ing agents if the distance between vehicles is less than the safe
distance, which is essential to prevent collisions and ensure
the safety of the vehicle queue. di,k is the actual distance
between vehicle i and the vehicle in front, and dsafe is the
preset minimum safe distance. ReLU(x) = max(0, x) used to
ensure that a safety item generates a penalty only if the actual
distance is below the safety threshold.
In addition, considering the communication delay problem,
each agent can only access the lagged observation information
when making a decision, and cannot directly obtain the current
true state. Therefore, this paper modify the reward function
based on conditional expectation to adapt it to the opti-
mal learning in the communication constrained environment.
Specifically, for each agent i, in the extended state Si,t, the
reward function of delay is defined as follows:
˜Ri,t
 Si,t, accCL
i,k

= Exi,t [Ri,t (xi,t, acci,t) | Si,t] .
(18)
This modification ensures that even in a communication-
constrained environment, agents can still make reasonable
decisions based on past observations and actions while maxi-
mizing their long-term rewards.
Therefore, each agent determines its action based on its
own observations and the messages received in a distributed
manner. This process is repeated for each time step under
different observations. This work aims to achieve comfort and
safety control of platoon. The ultimate goal of the RL model
is:
max
 
Jπ(s(0)) = lim
M→∞E
"M−1
X
t=0
γkri(s(t), π(s(t)))
#!
,
(19)
where Jπ(s(0) is the expected cost with initial condition
s(0) and control policy π,
γ is the discounted factor, M
is the number of steps; E(·) is the mathematical expectation.
The update strategy of the proposed DCT-MARL is given in
Algorithm 1.
B. Dec-POMDP with Dynamic Communication topology
The vehicles in the platoon exchange their state information
(such as position, velocity, and acceleration) through a V2V
wireless communication network. Each vehicle has its own
communication network, which can be modeled as a directed
weighted graph G = (T, V, E), where t ∈T is the set of
the trajectory in the time dimension, V represents the set of
vehicles. E ⊆V × V represents the set of communication
links, where (i, j) ∈E indicates that vehicle i can send
information to vehicle j, representing the communication con-
nection between vehicles. The adjacency trajectory matrices
for the dynamic directed graph and subgraphs are denoted by
A. When a node can access the observations of other nodes,
it can approximate the global state.
Based on Dec-POMDP, this paper propose a communication
topology using dynamic directed graphs. The structural prop-
erties of the graph are represented by the adjacency trajectory

7
Algorithm
1
DCT-MARL:
Dynamic
Communication
Topology-based Multi-Agent RL.
Ensure: Action Policy πi, and graph reasoning policy ρ
1: Initialize parameters θi, ϕi for each agent and ϕ for graph
reasoning;
2: Assign target parameters of Q-function: ϕi ←ϕi, and target
policy parameter: θi ←θi
3: D ←empty replay buffer
4: while not terminated do
5:
Sample A ∼ρϕ(A|s);
6:
Given current state s, compute oi(s, A) for all agents
and x;
7:
Sample ui ∼πi(· · · |oi(s, A));
8:
Take the joint action {ui}i∈N and observe own reward
ri and new state s′:
D ←D ∪{(s, {ui}i∈N, A, {ri}i∈N, s′)};
9:
for each agent do
10:
Update ϕi according to ∇ϕJQ(ϕi);
11:
Update θi according to ∇θiJπ(θi);
12:
Update ϕ according to 1
n
Pn
i=1 ∇ϕηi(ρϕ);
13:
Reset target Q-function: ϕi = βϕi + (1 −β)ϕi;
14:
end for
15: end while
matrix A, which is denoted as A ∈Bl×n×n, where B indicates
the Boolean matrix, l denotes the length of the trajectory and
n indicates the number of agents. If ⌈Aij
t ⌉= 0, then no
communication occurred from agent i to agent j at time t.
If ⌈Aij
t ⌉= 1, then communication transpired from agent i to
agent j at time t.
C. Multi-Key Gating Network-Based Dynamic Communica-
tion topology
During communication, each agent intuitively prefers to
interact with those agents that significantly influence its
decision-making strategy. Specifically, assuming agent i can
receive information from agent j, it first inputs its local
observation oi along with the ID of agent j into the model,
which then outputs a confidence score indicating the likelihood
of communication with agent j.
To quantify this causal influence, a feedforward neural
network is employed to implement causal inference, leveraging
the KL divergence to measure the causal confidence between
agent i and other agents:
DKL
 P(ui | u−ij, o)
 P(ui, uj | u−ij, o)

,
(20)
where P(ui | u−ij, o) and P(ui, uj | u−ij, o) represent two
conditional probability distributions over the action space of
agent i, and o denotes the joint observations of all agents. Here,
u−i refers to the joint actions of all agents excluding agent
i, and u−ij denotes the joint actions of all agents excluding
both agents i and j.
The latter probability distribution does not depend on agent
j’s actions, meaning that when making decisions, agent i
ignores the actions of agent j. Note that the conditional actions
of other agents u−i are sampled from their current policies.
The magnitude of KL divergence quantifies how agent i would
adjust its own policy if it considered agent j’s actions, thus
indicating the degree of correlation between agent j’s policy
and agent i’s policy.
These probability distributions are computed via the joint
action-value function. For instance, the softmax distribution
over agent i’s actions is given by:
P(ui | u−ij, o) =
exp(Q(ui, u−ij, o)/λ)
P
u′
i exp(Q(u′
i, u−ij, o)/λ),
(21)
where Q(u, o) is the joint action-value function, and λ ∈
R+ is the temperature parameter. The marginal distribution
P(ui | u−ij, o) is computed as follows:
P(ui | u−ij, o) =
X
uj
P(ui, uj | u−ij, o).
(22)
After computing causal influence, a multi-key gating net-
work is used to select m communication agents. Using the
Gumbel–Softmax activation, the network determines whether
an agent communicates or not:
keyt
i = gumbel-softmax
 Wv tanh
 Wqot−1
i
+ Wkot−1
i

,
(23)
where Gumbel-Softmax [35], [36] is a binary activation
(communicate or not), and the weight matrices Wv, Wq, and
Wk encode the communication relevance under dynamically
changing platoon topologies.
To improve interpretability and embed safety considerations,
a distance weighting module assigns higher weights to closer
vehicles, highlighting their critical role in collision avoidance:
ωj,t =
1
2|i−j|
P
l∈Ni,t
1
2|i−l|
,
(24)
where dij is the distance between vehicles i and j, and ε
is a small positive constant preventing division by zero.
Using the outputs of the gating network, the adjacency
matrix A is then constructed by aggregating keys:
Ai,k = max
 keyt
i

,
(25)
where keyk
i denotes the number of keys assigned to agent
i at time step t, and ⌈·⌉is the ceiling function. This process
dynamically adjusts the communication topology, while the
limited number of keys ensures that each agent only exchanges
information with selected neighbors, keeping the input dimen-
sion stable. Finally, all received messages are passed through
the message encoder network ei(·) to obtain encoded messages
ci, which are fed into the policy network to generate the action
distribution πi(ui | ci, oi).
V. EXPERIMENTAL SETTING AND METRICS
A. Experimental Setup
To validate the effectiveness of the proposed control strat-
egy, a platoon of six vehicles is modeled within a 1-km
highway segment in SUMO. The leading vehicle’s driving

8
trajectory is derived from real-world traffic data collected
on the eastbound I-80 highway in the San Francisco Bay
Area, sourced from the NGSIM dataset [37]. As a widely
recognized benchmark in platoon control research, the NGSIM
dataset encompasses congested traffic scenarios, enabling a
rigorous evaluation of the controller’s ability to manage stop-
and-go traffic oscillations frequently encountered in real-world
platoon operations. Integrating such realistic driving patterns
facilitates more effective policy learning and enhances the
applicability of the proposed approach to connected vehicle
platoons operating under complex and dynamic conditions.
For the communication simulation, the wireless channel
model incorporates both small-scale and large-scale fading
effects. Small-scale fading is modeled as Rayleigh fading,
which captures the rapid signal fluctuations caused by multi-
path propagation. Large-scale fading consists of path loss (PL)
and shadow fading (SF), jointly modeling the attenuation of
signal strength over distance and the slow variations caused
by obstacles in the environment.
Path loss is modeled using the WINNER+ B1 model rec-
ommended by 3GPP [38], which is defined as:
PL(d) = A0 + 10n log10
 d
d0

+ Xσ,
(dB)
(26)
where d0 is the reference distance; A0 is the intercept
representing the path loss at the reference distance d0; n
is the path loss exponent, which varies for different traffic
scenarios and is set to n = 2.15 for highway V2V scenarios;
Xσ represents shadow fading, modeled as a Gaussian random
variable with zero mean and variance σ2, caused by obstacles
such as trees, buildings, and vehicles. Formally,
Xσ ∼N(0, σ2),
σ = 3 dB.
(27)
The simulation environment models the communication
scenario and control algorithms using Python, and integrates
with SUMO for co-simulation and optimization via the TraCI
interface. The simulation time step and total duration are
synchronized with SUMO to ensure consistency. Table ??
summarizes the key simulation parameters.
TABLE I
SIMULATION PARAMETERS FOR EXPERIMENTAL SETUP.
Parameters
Value
Highway Length
1000m
Minimum Vehicle Velocity
0 m/s
Maximum Vehicle Velocity
30 m/s
Acceleration Range
-3 m/s2 to 3 m/s2
Platoon Vehicle Number
6
Transmission Power
23 dBm
Number of Subchannels
4
Subchannel Resource Blocks (RBs)
10
Channel Bandwidth
10 MHz (50 RBs)
Packet Size
190 bytes
Message Transmission Interval
100 ms
In the reward function of the DCT-MARL algorithm (Equa-
tion 15), the weighting coefficients ω1, ω2, ω3, and ω4 are
set to 1.0, 1.0, 0.1, and 10.0, respectively, to emphasize the
penalty for unsafe following distances. The algorithm adopts
a centralized training and decentralized execution framework.
Both the centralized critic and policy networks are imple-
mented with three fully connected layers, while the prior
network consists of two fully connected layers. Each hidden
layer contains 128 neurons. The activation function used in
all networks is the Rectified Linear Unit (ReLU), defined as
ReLU(x) = max(0, x).
Training is conducted for 1 million steps in a simulated
traffic environment, with an episode length of 600 steps.
The discount factor is set to γ = 0.99, and the learning
rates for the actor and critic networks are 3.0 × 10−4 and
2.5 × 10−4, respectively. Each algorithm is trained three
times using different random seeds to ensure robustness and
generalization, and all hyperparameters are selected through a
grid search process.
B. Evaluation Metrics
To comprehensively evaluate the performance of the pro-
posed platoon control strategy, this paper adopted two cat-
egories of metrics: platoon stability and driving comfort.
Platoon stability reflects the system’s ability to suppress inter-
vehicle disturbances and avoid amplification of oscillations
downstream. Following [21], this paper define the stability
index Si for each vehicle as the time-averaged weighted
squared deviation in headway and relative velocity:
Si = 1
Ns
Ns
X
t=1
si,cf(t)CsT
i,cf(t),
(28)
where si,cf(t) = [∆hi,i−1(t), ∆vi,i−1(t)] denotes the devi-
ation vector between vehicle i and its preceding vehicle at
time t, C is a weighting matrix, and Ns is the total number
of simulation steps. Lower values of Si correspond to better
string stability, reflecting reduced propagation of distance and
velocity errors across the platoon.
Driving comfort is assessed based on the smoothness of
acceleration changes. The normalized comfort score G′
i is
defined as:
G′
i = 1 −1
Ns
Ns
X
t=1
acci(t) −acci(t −1)
accmax
2
,
(29)
where acci(t) denotes the acceleration of vehicle i at time step
t, and amax is the maximum allowable acceleration change
used for normalization. Higher values of G′
i correspond to
smoother acceleration transitions and thus greater driving
comfort.
VI. PERFORMANCE RESULTS AND ANALYSIS
A. Control Performance against Existing Platoon Control
Strategies
To verify the effectiveness and robustness of the proposed
strategy, this paper conducts a comprehensive comparison
between the proposed DCT-MARL method and other state-
of-the-art methods. These include the traditional optimization-
based Dynamic Weights Optimization Control (DWOC) strat-
egy [20], which accounts for both communication delay and

9
TABLE II
QUANTIFIED METRICS FOR EACH CAV IN THE PLATOON CONTROLLED BY DIFFERENT POLICYS.
CAV1
CAV2
CAV3
CAV4
CAV5
String Stability
DWOC
0.109
0.177
0.266
0.295
0.312
D3PG
0.097
0.141
0.154
0.258
0.221
DCT-MARL
0.086
0.097
0.088
0.112
0.103
Driving Comfort
DWOC
0.512
0.404
0.358
0.329
0.302
D3PG
0.643
0.616
0.592
0.571
0.548
DCT-MARL
0.827
0.816
0.797
0.771
0.775
packet loss by dynamically compensating front-vehicle infor-
mation through communication-quality-aware weighting, and
the DRL-based D3PG method [16], which introduces a self-
adaptive topology control approach that significantly enhances
resilience under fluctuating communication conditions. To
ensure a fair comparison, the state space settings of D3PG are
aligned with our proposed method, including the incorporation
of a delay compensation mechanism.
Figure 2 illustrates the temporal responses of vehicle ve-
locity and acceleration under an oscillatory driving scenario.
Across all methods, a noticeable attenuation of acceleration
fluctuations is observed along the platoon, indicating partial
suppression of error propagation. However, notable discrepan-
cies persist in the response to abrupt velocity variations and
in the smooth attenuation of acceleration during convergence.
The DWOC strategy (Fig.2 (a)) achieves control stability
by adaptively re-weighting front-vehicle information, offering
a degree of robustness to delay and packet loss. However,
noticeable acceleration spikes between 15s and 25s reveal
challenges in ensuring smooth transitions during sudden lead
vehicle maneuvers. In contrast, D3PG (Fig.2(b)) improves
inter-agent coordination by selecting communication neigh-
bors using attention-based mechanisms. Nonetheless, due to
its single-agent DRL design lacking full MARL coordination,
downstream vehicles show delayed reactions to upstream
disturbances. The proposed DCT-MARL method (Fig.2(c))
consistently delivers the most stable and coordinated con-
trol responses, featuring minimal velocity fluctuations and
enhanced inter-vehicle coherence, thereby demonstrating su-
perior robustness under non-ideal communication conditions.
Table II summarizes quantitative results. Both DWOC and
D3PG maintain reasonable performance across the platoon,
yet DWOC exhibits disturbance amplification toward the rear
of the platoon, indicating limited suppression capability. Al-
though D3PG alleviates this issue via communication-aware
strategies, intermittent oscillations still occur under uncertain
communication conditions. In contrast, DCT-MARL achieves
the lowest string stability metrics across all vehicles, partic-
ularly in CAV3 to CAV5, demonstrating its superior ability
to suppress disturbance propagation. Moreover, DCT-MARL
yields the highest overall driving comfort scores, maintaining
low acceleration variance even for the last vehicle in the
platoon, which is typically most susceptible to disturbance,
thereby ensuring an improved passenger experience.
To illustrate this more clearly, Fig.3 presents the perfor-
mance comparison of various control strategies. The DCT-
MARL curve maintains a relatively flat comfort trajectory,
while all other baselines show progressively deteriorating per-
formance over time. This highlights DCT-MARL’s robustness
and resilience under dynamic and uncertain communication
conditions. By jointly considering topology adaptation, delay
compensation, and cooperative policy learning, the DCT-
MARL method achieves superior multi-objective optimization,
balancing safety, comfort, and stability more effectively than
DWOC, and D3PG.
In summary, the proposed DCT-MARL framework demon-
strates significant advantages over existing platoon control
methods by effectively mitigating the adverse effects of com-
munication delay and packet loss. It consistently enhances
string stability and driving comfort throughout the platoon,
especially for vehicles more vulnerable to disturbances.
B. Control Performance against Existing MARL Algorithms
To further assess the advantages of the proposed DCT-
MARL framework, this paper compare it against two represen-
tative MARL algorithms: Delay-Compensated MARL (DEC-
MARL) [25], which explicitly addresses communication delay
by extending the state space to incorporate historical control
outputs under a fixed communication topology. Learning-
based MARL (LEB-MARL) [26], which leverages causal
inference to infer communication topologies and regularizes
agent policies to enhance performance in multi-agent cooper-
ative scenarios.
To assess learning efficiency, the average episodic return is
depicted in Fig. 4, which compares the performance of the
proposed DCT-MARL algorithm against other MARL meth-
ods. As training progresses, DCT-MARL consistently achieves
higher rewards, indicating more effective policy optimization.
In contrast, DEC-MARL and LEB-MARL exhibit slower
convergence and lower final reward values, reflecting reduced
learning efficiency in dynamic communication environments.
These results demonstrate that DCT-MARL outperforms the
baselines in both convergence speed and reward performance,
highlighting its superior adaptability and learning capability.
Table III compares the control performance of the three
methods in terms of string stability and driving comfort for
each vehicle within the platoon. While DEC-MARL enhances
system stability to a certain extent under non-ideal commu-
nication conditions, the reliance on a fixed communication
topology and absence of dynamic adjustment mechanisms
cause significant performance degradation under high packet
loss rates and dynamic communication structures. This results

10
(a) DWOC Policy
(b) D3PG Policy
(c) DCT-MARL Policy
Fig. 2. Performance Results of Vehicle Platoon Under Different Strategies.(a) DWOC (b) D3PG (c) DCT-MARL
in greater spacing fluctuations among following vehicles and
a noticeable decline in driving comfort. LEB-MARL incor-
porates agent correlation and demonstrates certain advantages
in control accuracy. However, it fails to account for the time-
varying nature of communication quality, limiting robustness
under packet loss and topological disturbances and leading to
more pronounced oscillations in string stability. In contrast,
DCT-MARL consistently delivers more robust and stable con-
trol outcomes across all CAVs in the platoon.
Beyond training performance, the runtime efficiency of the
proposed DCT-MARL framework is evaluated during testing.
On a local platform equipped with a 2.0 GHz quad-core
Intel Core i5 processor and 16 GB of 3733 MHz LPDDR4X
memory, executing a 600-step simulation required approxi-
mately 3.7 seconds, indicating that each decision step takes
approximately 6 ms. Given the 100 ms sampling period of
vehicle control systems, this inference time is well within
the control horizon. These results demonstrate that DCT-
MARL not only achieves superior control performance but
also exhibits high inference efficiency, rendering it suitable
for realtime deployment in computationally constrained envi-
ronments.

11
Fig. 3. Quantified Metrics of Different Models.
TABLE III
QUANTIFIED METRICS FOR EACH CAV IN THE PLATOON CONTROLLED BY FCT-MARL AND DCT-MARL.
CAV1
CAV2
CAV3
CAV4
CAV5
String Stability
DEC-MARL
0.114
0.138
0.167
0.248
0.279
LEB-MARL
0.103
0.125
0.134
0.197
0.221
DCT-MARL
0.086
0.097
0.088
0.112
0.103
Driving Comfort
DEC-MARL
0.681
0.628
0.538
0.516
0.505
LEB-MARL
0.739
0.712
0.6358
0.673
0.629
DCT-MARL
0.827
0.816
0.797
0.771
0.775
Fig. 4. Average Episode Reward vs. Training Steps of Various Methods.
C. Eiffectiveness of Dynamic Communictaion Topology
To further examine the necessity and rationality of the dy-
namic communication topology mechanism, Fig. 5 illustrates
the communication heatmap among six platoon memebers
during the testing phase.
In the heatmap, the color intensity indicates the frequency
of message exchanges between agents. The vertical axis
represents the message sender, while the horizontal axis
corresponds to the receiver. In this visualization, a darker
Fig. 5.
Communication Heatmap of Connected Platoon with Dynamic
Topology.
color indicates a higher likelihood of information exchange,
reflecting stronger communication between specific vehicle
pairs. This allows us to intuitively assess how communication
patterns evolve under the dynamic topology.
Notably, as the leading vehicle operates as a noncontrollable
preset agent, it is only possible to observe whether other
vehicles receive messages from it, without direct access to

12
the messages received by the leader itself. Accordingly, the
corresponding cells representing the leader as a receiver are
shaded in light gray to indicate the absence of observable data.
It can be observed that while front-vehicle information
receives predominant attention in the control process, rear
vehicle data also demonstrates significant utilization. This
observation is consistent with the findings of [5], highlighting
the latent value of rear vehicle states in control decision
making. Compared to traditional fixed topologies, the dynamic
topology can adaptively adjust communication agents in real
time based on control needs and information value. These
results demonstrate the meaningfulness and effectiveness of
incorporating dynamic communication topology under non-
ideal communication conditions.
VII. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORKS
This paper proposes a DCT-MARL framework to address
connected vehicle platoon control under non-ideal V2V com-
munications characterized by time-varying delay and packet
loss. Specifically, a multi-key gated communication mecha-
nism is introduced, which dynamically adjusts the commu-
nication topology based on the correlations among vehicles
and their current communication status to effectively mitigate
packet loss. Furthermore, a state augmentation scheme is de-
signed to incorporate historical control actions and communi-
cation delay information into each agent’s state space, ensuring
the preservation of the Markov property despite delayed ob-
servations. This enhancement further improves the robustness
of the system in realistic V2V communication environment.
Experimental results demonstrate that the proposed approach
significantly improves platoon stability and driving comfort
of vehicle platoon compared to existing advanced methods.
Future research will further investigate the mechanism of
non-ideal communication and explore the joint optimization
of communication and control, enabling more adaptive and
resource-efficient platoon coordination.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was supported by Beijing Natural Science Foun-
dation under Grant L202018, the National Natural Science
Foundation of China under Grant 61931005, the Key Labora-
tory of Internet of Vehicle Technical Innovation and Testing
(CAICT), Ministry of Industry and Information Technology
under Grant No. KL-2023-001.
REFERENCES
[1] S. Sacone, “Platoon control in traffic networks: New challenges and
opportunities,” IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems,
vol. 25, no. 4, pp. 149–183, 2024.
[2] M. Nandhini and M. M. Rabik, “A comprehensive overview of the
alignment between platoon control approaches and clustering strategies,”
Green Energy and Intelligent Transportation, p. 100223, 2024.
[3] A. Balador, A. Bazzi, U. Hernandez-Jayo, I. de la Iglesia, and H. Ah-
madvand, “A survey on vehicular communication for cooperative truck
platooning application,” Vehicular Communications, vol. 35, p. 100460,
2022.
[4] A. Boubakri and S. M. Gammar, “Intra-platoon communication in
autonomous vehicle: A survey,” in 2020 9th IFIP International Con-
ference on Performance Evaluation and Modeling in Wireless Networks
(PEMWN).
IEEE, 2020, pp. 1–6.
[5] C. Zhao, X. Duan, L. Cai, and P. Cheng, “Vehicle platooning with
non-ideal communication networks,” IEEE transactions on vehicular
technology, vol. 70, no. 1, pp. 18–32, 2020.
[6] T. Liu, L. Lei, K. Zheng, and X. Shen, “Multitimescale control and com-
munications with deep reinforcement learning—part i: Communication-
aware vehicle control,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal, vol. 11, no. 9,
pp. 15 386–15 401, 2023.
[7] H. Gao, C.-C. Yen, and M. Zhang, “Drl based platooning control
with traffic signal synchronization for delay and fuel optimization,”
Transportation Research Part C: Emerging Technologies, vol. 163, p.
104655, 2024.
[8] Z. Wang, S. Jin, L. Liu, C. Fang, M. Li, and S. Guo, “Design of intel-
ligent connected cruise control with vehicle-to-vehicle communication
delays,” IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology, vol. 71, no. 8, pp.
9011–9025, 2022.
[9] F. Ma, J. Wang, S. Zhu, S. Y. Gelbal, Y. Yang, B. Aksun-Guvenc, and
L. Guvenc, “Distributed control of cooperative vehicular platoon with
nonideal communication condition,” IEEE Transactions on Vehicular
Technology, vol. 69, no. 8, pp. 8207–8220, 2020.
[10] J. Liu, Z. Wang, and L. Zhang, “Integrated vehicle-following control for
four-wheel-independent-drive electric vehicles against non-ideal V2X
communication,” IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology, vol. 71,
no. 4, pp. 3648–3659, 2022.
[11] Y. Bian, X. Wang, Y. Tan, M. Hu, C. Du, Z. Sun, and G. Guo,
“Distributed model predictive control of connected and automated
vehicles with markov packet loss,” IEEE Transactions on Transportation
Electrification, 2024.
[12] F. Navas and V. Milan´es, “Mixing v2v-and non-v2v-equipped vehicles in
car following,” Transportation research part C: emerging technologies,
vol. 108, pp. 167–181, 2019.
[13] L. Zhang, L. Feng, M. Zhang, G. Ji, and L. Yang, “Abnormal com-
munication internet-connected vehicle platoon dynamical modeling and
characteristics study,” Physica A: Statistical Mechanics and its Applica-
tions, vol. 651, p. 130012, 2024.
[14] P. Wang, H. Deng, J. Zhang, L. Wang, M. Zhang, and Y. Li, “Model
predictive control for connected vehicle platoon under switching com-
munication topology,” IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation
Systems, vol. 23, no. 7, pp. 7817–7830, 2021.
[15] R. Liu, Y. Ren, H. Yu, Z. Li, and H. Jiang, “Connected and automated
vehicle platoon maintenance under communication failures,” Vehicular
Communications, vol. 35, p. 100467, 2022.
[16] J. Wang, X. Li, J. Guo, and K. Li, “Self learning-based platooning
control strategy for connected autonomous vehicles with switching
topologies,” IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems,
2024.
[17] O. Lappi, “Gaze strategies in driving–an ecological approach,” Frontiers
in psychology, vol. 13, p. 821440, 2022.
[18] V. Vegamoor, S. Rathinam, and S. Darbha, “String stability of connected
vehicle platoons under lossy v2v communication,” IEEE Transactions
on Intelligent Transportation Systems, vol. 23, no. 7, pp. 8834–8845,
2021.
[19] Z. Shen, Y. Liu, Z. Li, and Y. Wu, “Distributed vehicular platoon control
considering communication delays and packet dropouts,” Journal of the
Franklin Institute, vol. 361, no. 7, p. 106703, 2024. [Online]. Available:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0016003224001248
[20] X. Wang, C. Xu, X. Zhao, H. Li, and X. Jiang, “Stability and
safety analysis of connected and automated vehicle platoon considering
dynamic communication topology,” IEEE Transactions on Intelligent
Transportation Systems, 2024.
[21] A. Peake, J. McCalmon, B. Raiford, T. Liu, and S. Alqahtani, “Multi-
agent reinforcement learning for cooperative adaptive cruise control,”
in 2020 IEEE 32nd International Conference on Tools with Artificial
Intelligence (ICTAI).
IEEE, 2020, pp. 15–22.
[22] H. Lin, C. Lyu, Y. He, Y. Liu, K. Gao, and X. Qu, “Enhancing
state representation in multi-agent reinforcement learning for platoon-
following models,” IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology, 2024.
[23] Y. Xu, Y. Shi, X. Tong, S. Chen, and Y. Ge, “A multi-agent reinforcement
learning based control method for connected and autonomous vehicles
in a mixed platoon,” IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology, 2024.
[24] M. Hua, C. Zhang, F. Zhang, Z. Li, X. Yu, H. Xu, and Q. Zhou, “Energy
management of multi-mode plug-in hybrid electric vehicle using multi-
agent deep reinforcement learning,” Applied Energy, vol. 348, p. 121526,
2023.
[25] Z. Wang, Y. Xue, L. Liu, H. Zhang, C. Qu, and C. Fang, “Multi-agent
drl-controlled connected and automated vehicles in mixed traffic with
time delays,” IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems,
vol. 25, no. 11, November 2024.

13
[26] Z. Ding, T. Huang, and Z. Lu, “Learning individually inferred commu-
nication for multi-agent cooperation,” Advances in neural information
processing systems, vol. 33, pp. 22 069–22 079, 2020.
[27] H. Liu, D. Chu, W. Zhong, B. Gao, Y. Lu, S. Han, and W. Lei, “Compen-
sation control of commercial vehicle platoon considering communication
delay and response lag,” Computers and Electrical Engineering, vol.
119, p. 109623, 2024.
[28] D. Chen, K. Zhang, Y. Wang, X. Yin, Z. Li, and D. Filev,
“Communication-efficient
decentralized
multi-agent
reinforcement
learning for cooperative adaptive cruise control,” IEEE Transactions on
Intelligent Vehicles, 2024.
[29] M. Parvini, M. R. Javan, N. Mokari, B. Abbasi, and E. A. Jorswieck,
“Aoi-aware resource allocation for platoon-based c-v2x networks via
multi-agent multi-task reinforcement learning,” IEEE Transactions on
Vehicular Technology, 2023.
[30] Z. Zhang, B. He, B. Cheng, and G. Li, “Bridging training and execution
via dynamic directed graph-based communication in cooperative multi-
agent systems,” in Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial
Intelligence, vol. 39, no. 22, 2025, pp. 23 395–23 403.
[31] H. Mao, Z. Zhang, Z. Xiao, Z. Gong, and Y. Ni, “Learning agent commu-
nication under limited bandwidth by message pruning,” in Proceedings
of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, vol. 34, no. 04, 2020,
pp. 5142–5149.
[32] T. Chu, S. Chinchali, and S. Katti, “Multi-agent reinforcement learning
for networked system control,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.01339, 2020.
[33] T. Chu and U. Kalabi´c, “Model-based deep reinforcement learning
for cacc in mixed-autonomy vehicle platoon,” in 2019 IEEE 58th
Conference on Decision and Control (CDC).
IEEE, 2019, pp. 4079–
4084.
[34] Y. Du, B. Liu, V. Moens, Z. Liu, Z. Ren, J. Wang, X. Chen, and
H. Zhang, “Learning correlated communication topology in multi-
agent reinforcement learning,” in Proceedings of the 20th International
Conference on Autonomous Agents and MultiAgent Systems, 2021, pp.
456–464.
[35] E. Jang, S. Gu, and B. Poole, “Categorical reparameterization with
gumbel-softmax,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1611.01144, 2016.
[36] C. J. Maddison, A. Mnih, and Y. W. Teh, “The concrete distribution:
A continuous relaxation of discrete random variables,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1611.00712, 2016.
[37] U. D. of Transportation, “Ngsim – next generation simulation,” 2007,
accessed: Apr. 12, 2018.
[38] 3GPP, “Study on LTE-based V2X services (v14.0.0, release 14),” 3rd
Generation Partnership Project (3GPP), Technical Report TR 36.885, Jul
2016.
Yaqi Xu received her M.Sc in computer technol-
ogy from Jilin University in 2022. She is currently
pursuing a Ph.D. degree from State Key Labo-
ratory of Networking and Switching Technology,
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
(BUPT). She is interested in topics related to vehicu-
lar networks, especially Connected and Autonomous
Vehicles (CAVs) Platoon and Vehicle to Everything
(V2X) Communication.
Yan Shi received her Ph.D. degree from BUPT in
2007. She is currently an associated professor of
school of computer science (national pilot software
engineering school) and State Key Laboratory of
Networking and Switching Technology, BUPT. Her
current research interests include vehicular networks
and applications, as well as mobile computing.
Jin Tian is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree
from the State Key Laboratory of Networking and
Switching Technology, BUPT. His research interests
include Cellular Vehicle-to-Everything (C-V2X) and
the application of machine learning in vehicular
networks.
Fanzeng Xia received: i) a B.A.Sc. degree in
Computer Engineering from Queen’s University,
Kingston, Canada, in 2019; ii) a B.E. degree in Soft-
ware Engineering from Jilin University, Changchun,
China, in 2019; iii) an M.Sc. degree in Computer
Science from New York University, New York,
United States, in 2021. He is currently a Ph.D.
candidate at The Chinese University of Hong Kong,
Shenzhen, China, advised by Professor Tongxin Li.
His research focuses on foundation models, rein-
forcement learning, and in-context decision-making.
Tongxin Li received his Ph.D. degree from Caltech
in the Department of Computing and Mathematical
Sciences in 2022. He is an Assistant Professor,
Presidential Young Fellow in the School of Data
Science (SDS), CUHK-Shenzhen and an Adjunct
Assistant Professor at Shenzhen Loop Area Institute.
He interned as an applied scientist at Amazon Web
Services (AWS) in 2020 and 2021. His research
interests focus on interdisciplinary topics in learn-
ing, control, and cyber-physical systems. He was
a recipient of the 2022 ACM SIGEnergy Doctoral
Dissertation Award (Honorable Mention).
Shanzhi Chen received the bachelor’s degree from
Xidian University, Xi’an, China in 1991, and the
Ph.D. degree from Beijing University of Posts and
Telecommunications, Beijing, China in 1997. He
joined the Datang Telecom Technology and Industry
Group and the China Academy of Telecommuni-
cation Technology (CATT) in 1994 and has been
serving as the CTO and EVP of Research and
Development from 2008 to 2012. Now, Dr. Chen is
the EVP of R&D and CTO of China Information
and Communication Technology Group Co., Ltd.
(CICT), the director of State Key Laboratory of Wireless Mobile Commu-
nications, and the board director of SMIC. He has contributed to the design,
standardization, and development of 4G TD-LTE, 5G, and C-V2X communi-
cation systems. His current research interests include B5G/6G, C-V2X, and
integrated terrestrial-satellite communication systems. He is an IEEE fellow,
has served as the Editor-in-Chief of Telecommunications Science, an Area
Editor of the IEEE Internet of Things Journal, and an Editor of IEEE Network,
as well as a member of TPC Chairs of many international conferences.
Yuming Ge received his Ph.D. degree from Institute
of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of
Sciences in 2013. He is the director of Automotive
and Transportation Department of China Academy
of Information and Communications Technology
(CAICT) and the leader of C-V2X Working Group
of IMT-2020 (5G) Promotion Group. He is interested
in topics related to C-V2X communication and ve-
hicular applications.
