Distributionally Robust Markov Games with Average Reward
Zachary Roch 1 Yue Wang 1 2
Abstract
We
propose
and
study
distributionally
ro-
bust
Markov
games
(DR-MGs)
with
the
average-reward criterion as a crucial framework
for multi-agent decision-making under model mis-
matches and over extended horizons. Under a
standard irreducible assumption, we first derive
a correspondence between the optimal policies
and the solutions of the robust Bellman equation,
based on which we further show the existence of
a stationary Nash Equilibrium (NE) of the game.
We further study DR-MGs under a more general
weakly communicating setting. We construct a
set-valued map based on the constant-gain opti-
mal robust Bellman operator and show that its
value is a subset of the best-response policies. We
further prove that this map admits a fixed point,
which implies the existence of NE. We then de-
sign two algorithms, Robust Nash-Iteration and
robust TD Descent, with provably convergent
guarantees. Finally, we show that the NE un-
der average-reward can be approximated by the
ones for the discounted DR-MGs as the discount
factor approaches one. Our studies provide a com-
prehensive theoretical and algorithmic foundation
for decision-making in complex, uncertain, and
long-running multi-player environments.
1. Introduction
A Markov Game (MG) or stochastic game provides a
powerful mathematical framework for modeling sequential
decision-making in competitive multi-agent environments
(Shapley, 1953; Filar & Vrieze, 1996; Littman, 1994; Fink,
1964). Solving an MG involves finding an equilibrium
policy profile for all players, where each player aims to
1Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Uni-
versity of Central Florida, Orlando, Florida, USA. 2Department
of Computer Science,
University of Central Florida,
Or-
lando, Florida, USA. Correspondence to:
Zachary Roch
<zachary.roch@ucf.edu>, Yue Wang <yue.wang@ucf.edu>.
Proceedings of the 43 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Seoul, South Korea. PMLR 306, 2026. Copyright 2026
by the author(s).
maximize their own cumulative reward. However, a critical
challenge in practice is the potential for a mismatch between
the assumed MG model and the true underlying environ-
ment. This discrepancy, commonly called the Sim-to-Real
gap (McMahan et al., 2024), can arise from various sources,
including environmental non-stationarity, inherent modeling
errors, exogenous disturbances, or even adversarial attacks
(Bukharin et al., 2023; Ma et al., 2023). Consequently,
policies derived from a misspecified model can exhibit sig-
nificantly degraded performance when deployed.
To address this vulnerability, the framework of distribution-
ally robust Markov Games (DR-MGs) has been developed
(Zhang et al., 2020; Kardes¸ et al., 2011), extending the prin-
ciples of distributionally robust Markov Decision Processes
(MDPs) (Bagnell et al., 2001; Nilim & El Ghaoui, 2003;
Iyengar, 2005) to the multi-agent setting. Instead of relying
on a single, fixed MG model, the robust approach seeks to
find an equilibrium that optimizes the worst-case perfor-
mance over a predefined uncertainty set of plausible game
models under potential model mismatches. The resulting
robust equilibrium provides a performance guarantee across
all models within this set, thereby ensuring each agent’s
resilience against model mismatch.
The nature of a DR-MG problem is fundamentally shaped
by the optimality criterion used. Much of the prior work
has concentrated on the finite-horizon (Ma et al., 2023;
Shi et al., 2025; 2024; Jiao & Li, 2024; Li et al., 2025;
Blanchet et al., 2023) or discounted-reward setting (Zhang
et al., 2020; Kardes¸ et al., 2011), where the objective is to
maximize the expected reward over a finite number of steps
or a discounted sum of rewards.
In these formulations, the influence of future rewards dimin-
ishes exponentially, which often simplifies analysis as the
results are less dependent on the long-term chain structure
of the underlying game. However, despite the analytical ele-
gance of these settings, policies learned under them can be
suboptimal for multi-agent systems designed to operate over
extended or indefinite time horizons, such as in warehouse
robotics (Krnjaic et al., 2024), communication networks
(Qu et al., 2020), autonomous vehicle coordination (Peake
et al., 2020), financial markets (Vadori et al., 2024), or even
peer-to-peer energy trading (Qiu et al., 2021). In these sce-
narios, the long-term average reward is a more natural and
1
arXiv:2508.03136v4  [cs.MA]  21 Jun 2026

Distributionally Robust Markov Games with Average Reward
meaningful performance measure. However, the study of
DR-MGs under the average-reward criterion is nascent and
fraught with complexities not present in the discounted or
finite-horizon cases. The analysis of average-reward games
hinges on the limiting behavior of the underlying stochastic
process, making it markedly more intricate (Sobel, 1971).
For instance, a general non-robust vanilla Markov game with
average reward may not have a stationary Nash Equilibrium
(Filar & Vrieze, 1996); the direct correspondence between
stationary policies and the limit points of state-action fre-
quencies, a cornerstone of discounted analysis, breaks down
in the average-reward setting even for single-agent MDPs,
except under restrictive structural assumptions (Puterman,
2014; Atia et al., 2021). This difficulty is compounded
in the multi-agent context, where strategic interactions are
intertwined with the uncertain, complex dynamics.
Moreover, none of the methods for DR-MGs under the dis-
counted reward or finite horizon can be extended to the
average-reward setting (also see our detailed discussion in
Section 3). The existence of (non-stationary) Nash Equi-
librium under finite horizon is derived through backward
induction (Blanchet et al., 2023), which does not apply to
infinite-horizon settings. The existence of a stationary Nash
Equilibrium under the discounted reward criterion is de-
rived in (Kardes¸ et al., 2011), which, however, heavily relies
on the uniqueness of the solution to the discounted robust
Bellman equation (Iyengar, 2005) and hence cannot be ap-
plied to the average reward setting. To date, the literature
on average-reward DR-MGs remains sparse, leaving fun-
damental questions about the structure of robust equilibria
and the design of convergent solution algorithms largely
unanswered.
In this paper, we develop a comprehensive study of DR-MGs
under the average-reward formulation. Our contributions
are summarized as follows.
Existence of Robust Nash Equilibrium: We first study the
solvability of average reward DR-MGs, i.e., the existence of
robust NE. We first note that, under the irreducible setting,
finding the best response policy of an agent is equivalent to
finding the solution to the robust Bellman equation under
average reward. Based on such an equivalence, we show that
its solution set is convex and semi-continuous, which further
implies the fixed point of the best-response mapping and the
existence of a stationary Nash Equilibrium. We further study
the more general weakly communicating DR-MGs, where
such correspondence fails. We instead construct a proxy
mapping based on the Bellman equation and show that it is
a subset of the best-response mapping. After characterizing
the convexity and continuity of the mapping, we prove the
existence of NE. These results address the fundamental
solvability question under these complex, robust, and long-
term horizon competitive scenarios.
Convergent Algorithms: We then design concrete algo-
rithms to find the robust NE in average reward DR-MGs.
Inspired by the standard Nash value iteration approach, we
first propose a robust Nash iteration algorithm. Under some
additional assumptions on the game structure and a norm-
form game NE computing oracle, we prove the convergence
to a robust NE of our algorithm. Moreover, to bypass these
assumptions and the computation oracle, we further develop
an equivalent characterization of the NE in terms of tempo-
ral difference error, whose minimizer is shown to be a robust
NE. We then design a two-time-scale algorithm to minimize
the TD error. The algorithm does not require any NE oracle,
and can be executed efficiently. We further develop its sta-
tionary convergence guarantee. Our studies hence provide
the first comprehensive and algorithmic understanding of
solving average-reward DR-MGs.
Connection to Discounted Equilibria: We further study
the connection between the DR-MGs under average and
discounted reward. We show that the robust NE under the
average reward can be effectively approximated by the ro-
bust NE under the discounted reward with a discount factor
large enough. Such a connection enables us to solve the com-
plicated and challenging average reward DR-MGs through
the discounted ones, utilizing their element mathematical
properties and extensively developed algorithms.
2. Preliminaries and Problem Formulation
Markov Decision Processes.
A Markov decision
process (MDP) (S, A, P, r) is specified by:
a state
space S, an action space A, a transition kernel P =
{pa
s ∈∆(S), a ∈A, s ∈S}1, where pa
s is the distribution
of the next state over S upon taking action a in state s (with
pa
s,s′ denoting the probability of transitioning to s′), and a
reward function r : S × A →[0, 1]. At each time step t,
the agent at state st takes an action at, at which point the
environment transitions to the next state st+1 according to
pat
st , and produces a reward signal r(st, at) ∈[0, 1] to the
agent. We write rt = r(st, at) for convenience.
A stationary policy π : S →∆(A) is a distribution
over A for any given state s, meaning the agent takes
action a at state s with probability π(a|s).
The goal
of an MDP is to maximize the cumulative reward. The
more extensively studied criterion is the discounted reward,
whose objective function is the discounted value function:
V π
P (s) ≜Eπ,P [P∞
t=0 γtrt|S0 = s], where γ ∈[0, 1) is
some discount factor. When long-term performance is of
interest, the average reward is generally adopted as the
criterion of choice. The average reward induced by fol-
lowing policy π starting from state s ∈S is defined as
gπ
P(s) ≜lim infn→∞Eπ,P
 1
n
Pn−1
t=0 rt|S0 = s

.
1∆(S): the (|S| −1)-dimensional probability simplex on S.
2

Distributionally Robust Markov Games with Average Reward
Markov Games. Markov games (MGs) are the extension
of MDPs under the multi-agent setting (Littman, 1994),
specified by (N, S, A = ×i∈N Ai, {ri}i∈N , P), where
N = {1, 2, . . . , N} is the set of all agents or players, S
is the state space that all agents operate within, Ai denotes
agent i’s action space. In an MG, both rewards and state
transitions are determined by the joint actions of all agents.
At some state s, all agents act simultaneously by taking a
joint action a = (a1, . . . , aN) ∈A. Agent i receives a re-
ward of ri(s, a) for all i ∈N, and the next state is generated
following the transition kernel Pa
s.
In MGs, each agent i has its own policy πi, resulting in a
joint (product) policy π = (π1, ..., πN). Each agent shares
different goals as they have different reward functions to
optimize their own value function/average reward based on
their own reward and the joint policy: V π
P,i or gπ
P,i. Due
to possible conflicting goals between agents, an MG aims
to find some equilibria among all agents. In this work,
we focus our study on the stationary Nash Equilibrium
(NE). More specifically, a stationary NE is a product policy
π⋆= (π⋆
1, ..., π⋆
N), such that no single agent can improve
its objective function by deviating from it, while the others
stick to π⋆:
V π⋆
P,i (ρ) ≥V
(π⋆
−i,πi)
P,i
(ρ), ∀i ∈N, ∀πi ∈Πi,
(1)
for some initial distribution ρ and V π
P,i(ρ) ≜Es∼ρ[V π
P,i(s)],
and Πi denotes the set of stationary policies for agent i, π⋆
−i
denotes the joint policy of all other agents except i from π⋆,
and (π⋆
−i, πi) is the joint policy. The existence of a station-
ary NE is derived for MGs with discounted reward (Fink,
1964) and average-reward MGs with additional structural
assumptions (Filar & Vrieze, 1996).
Distributionally Robust Markov Games. Different from
MGs, distributionally robust Markov games (DR-MGs)
do not have a fixed transition kernel, but rather an uncer-
tainty set P of transition kernels. We consider the stan-
dard (s, a)-rectangular uncertainty set P = ×(s,a)∈S×APa
s
(Iyengar, 2005; Nilim & El Ghaoui, 2003; Zhang et al.,
2020; Blanchet et al., 2023; Shi et al., 2024), where the
uncertainty set is independently defined over all (s, a) pairs.
After all agents take their joint action a at state s, the next
state is determined by an arbitrary kernel Pa
s ∈Pa
s . In DR-
MGs, agents adopt the principle of pessimism and optimize
for the worst-case performance, which is defined as the ro-
bust value function V π
P,i(ρ) ≜minP∈P V π
P,i(ρ), and robust
average reward gπ
P,i(ρ) ≜minP∈P gπ
P,i(ρ). The notion of
Nash Equilibrium is similarly defined in terms of worst-case
performance. In this paper, we focus on DR-MGs with aver-
age reward whose Nash Equilibrium is some product policy
π⋆such that for some initial state distribution ρ,
gπ⋆
P,i(ρ) ≥g
(π⋆
−i,πi)
P,i
(ρ), ∀i ∈N, ∀πi.
(2)
3. Hardness in Average-Reward DR-MGs
DR-MGs under finite-horizon or discounted reward are ex-
tensively studied recently (Zhang et al., 2020; Jiao & Li,
2024; Blanchet et al., 2023; Shi et al., 2025; Ma et al., 2023;
Kardes¸ et al., 2011; McMahan et al., 2024), yet extend-
ing them to the average-reward setting is non-trivial. At
a high level, two issues make the average-reward regime
qualitatively more challenging: (1). the presence of a player-
specific environment that selects worst-case transition ker-
nels, which breaks the usual min–max duality even in dis-
counted zero-sum games; and (2). The intricate structure of
(robust) average reward, which depends sensitively on the
chain decomposition and is far less tractable.
Player-specific environment and failure of min–max du-
ality. In a standard (non-robust) Markov game with a fixed
transition kernel P, the existence of equilibria in multi-
player general-sum MGs was established by (Fink, 1964).
In two-player zero-sum games with discounted reward, the
analysis is built on a clean saddle-point structure.
Let
r1 = −r2 = r and denote by V (π1,π2)
P,r
(ρ) the γ-discounted
value of player 1 under joint policy (π1, π2) and initial dis-
tribution ρ. Then the classical result of (Shapley, 1953)
shows that
max
π1 min
π2 V (π1,π2)
P,r
(ρ) = min
π2 max
π1 V (π1,π2)
P,r
(ρ),
(3)
and any maximizer/minimizer pair in (3) is a stationary
discounted NE. Similar arguments, combined with the limit
γ →1, underlie many existence results for non-robust
average-reward Markov games; see, e.g., (Filar & Vrieze,
1996; Sennott, 1994; Rieder, 1995).
In the distributionally robust setting, the situation changes
qualitatively. The model uncertainty is encoded by an am-
biguity set P of transition kernels. Conceptually, this intro-
duces a ”player-specific environment” (rather than a mono-
lithic adversarial third player) that aims to minimize the
specific agent’s payoff, potentially propelling the overall
system into different recurrent classes depending on the
agents’ joint policy. Crucially, because different agents have
different reward functions, in general their associated worst-
case kernels need not coincide. Consequently, even in a
two-player zero-sum game with strictly opposing rewards
(r1 = −r2 = r), the robust value functions are not strictly
opposing (VP,r1 ̸= −VP,r2), forcing this to be treated as a
general-sum game.
See that the robust counterpart of (3) splits into
two distinct problems.
From the perspective of
player
1
(maximizer),
the
worst-case
is
governed
by
maxπ1 minπ2 minP ∈P V (π1,π2)
P,r
(ρ),
while
from
the
perspective
of
player
2
(minimizer),
whose
reward
is
−r,
the
worst
case
is
governed
by
minπ2 maxπ1 maxP ∈P V (π1,π2)
P,r
(ρ).
In
general,
these
3

Distributionally Robust Markov Games with Average Reward
two values need not coincide:
max
π1 min
π2 min
P ∈P V (π1,π2)
P,r
(ρ) ̸= min
π2 max
π1 max
P ∈P V (π1,π2)
P,r
(ρ),
meaning that in general-sum games, the min–max duality
which guarantees a saddle-point in non-robust studies breaks
down for DR-MGs. In fact, there is no saddle-point struc-
ture to exploit for discounted and zero-sum settings, and this
problem is only exacerbated in general-sum or multi-player
settings. Therefore, establishing the existence of an equilib-
rium is significantly harder as neither Shapley’s fixed-point
argument or standard discounted saddle-point theory can be
directly reused to establish NE existence in robust games.
One might hope to recover average-reward NE by letting
the discount factor γ →1 in robust discounted games,
using uniform convergence of robust value functions to
interchange the order of max, min, and lim (Wang et al.,
2023b). However, the failure of min–max duality already
at the discounted level implies that this limit approach still
does not yield NE existence for average-reward DR-MGs,
and it does not apply at all to multi-player general-sum
games.
Complicated structure of robust average reward and an
impossibility example. The second difficulty comes from
the structure of the (robust) average reward itself. Even with-
out robustness, Markov games under the average-reward
criterion need not admit a stationary NE in general (Filar &
Vrieze, 1996; Wikecek & Altman, 2015; Lozovanu, 2016;
Thuijsman, 1997). The usual link between stationary poli-
cies and stationary/occupancy distributions breaks down
except under additional structural assumptions such as ir-
reducibility or unichain conditions (Puterman, 2014; Atia
et al., 2021). This makes it substantially harder to reason
about long-run behavior and to construct equilibria.
Robustness further complicates the picture. The robust av-
erage reward must account for the worst-case choice of
transition kernels; the resulting robust Bellman equations
are nonlinear, may admit multiple solutions, and their solv-
ability and uniqueness are largely unresolved in prior work
(Wang et al., 2023b;c; Wang & Si, 2025). In particular, ex-
isting algorithms for robust average-reward reinforcement
learning either rely on incorrect Bellman solvability claims
or bypass the average-reward Bellman equation altogether
via discounted reductions. As a consequence, neither the
techniques for discounted DR-MGs (Kardes¸ et al., 2011;
Zhang et al., 2020) nor those for non-robust average-reward
MGs (Guo & Yang, 2008; Hern´andez-Lerma & Lasserre,
2000; Guo & Hern´andez-Lerma, 2003; Zheng & Guo, 2024;
Nowak, 1999; IWASE et al., 1976; K¨uenle & Schurath,
2003; Tanaka & Wakuta, 1977; Ja´skiewicz & Nowak, 2001;
Wikecek & Altman, 2015) can be directly transplanted to
distributionally robust average-reward games.
To illustrate that these issues are not merely technical, we
show that, without any structural assumptions, average-
reward DR-MGs may fail to admit any stationary NE.
Lemma 3.1. There exists a finite-state, two-player zero-sum
DR-MG under the average-reward criterion that admits no
stationary robust Nash equilibrium.
The construction uses a simple three-state, two-action zero-
sum DR-MG. The underlying Markov chains induced by the
ambiguity set are multi-chain, where the adversary can dis-
continuously alter the chain structure to force the agent into
different recurrent classes based on changes in its policy.
Lemma 3.1 demonstrates that average reward DR-MGs are
ill-posed without some structural assumptions. In the re-
mainder of the paper, we therefore focus on two standard
classes of average-reward problems where such a structure is
present: in Section 4 we study irreducible DR-MGs, where
every induced Markov chain under any stationary joint pol-
icy and any admissible kernel belongs to a single recurrent
class; and in Section 5 we relax this to weakly communicat-
ing DR-MGs, which allow multiple recurrent classes but
still admit a well-defined optimal robust average reward.
4. NE of Irreducible DR-MGs
As discussed above, the existence of a NE cannot be guaran-
teed without any structural assumptions. In this section, we
first study a relatively easier setting, where the underlying
DR-MG is assumed to be irreducible.
Assumption 4.1. For any deterministic joint policy π and
any transition kernel P ∈P, the induced Markov chain
(S, A, Pπ) is irreducible, i.e., all states belong to a single
recurrent class. Moreover, P is compact and convex.
Remark 4.2. Irreducibility is a standard assumption (slightly
stronger than the unichain assumption (Wang et al., 2023b;c;
2024; Roch et al., 2025b;a)) in robust average reward studies
(Xu et al., 2025b;a). Under this assumption, the robust
average reward gπ
P(ρ) = gπ
P(s) is always a constant over
all initial states, ensuring the tractability of robust average
reward. Hence in this section, we omit the initial state and
interchangeably use gπ
P gπ
P(ρ), and gπ
P(s).
In non-robust average reward MG studies, the NE can be
proved by studying the induced stationary/occupancy distri-
bution (Wikecek & Altman, 2015). However, when consid-
ering robustness, the worst-case stationary distribution set
becomes much more complicated. For example, it is non-
convex (Wang et al., 2022a; Zhang et al., 2024b; Ma et al.,
2025), whereas the convexity is necessary in non-robust
proofs and hence cannot be adapted. We thus propose a
direct approach by studying the best response mapping.
Definition 4.3 (Best Response mapping). In an average-
reward DR-MG, fix agent i and the joint policy π−i of all
other agents. The best response mapping of agent i w.r.t.
4

Distributionally Robust Markov Games with Average Reward
π−i is a set-valued mapping defined as
BRi(π−i) ≜

πi : g(π−i,πi)
P,i
= max
µi g(π−i,µi)
P,i

.
(4)
That is, the best response policy is agent i’s optimal policy
when other agents fix their policies. A standard result in
game theory literature (Osborne, 2003; Fudenberg & Ti-
role, 1991) is that, π⋆is a Nash Equilibrium if and only if
π⋆
i ∈BRi(π⋆
−i), ∀i ∈N, i.e., π⋆is a fixed point of the BR
mapping: π⋆∈BR(π⋆) = (×iBRi(π−i)). Hence, proving
the existence of NE is equivalent to showing the BR map-
ping has a fixed point, which is generally obtained through
the Kakutani fixed point theorem (Lemma D.4). Our studies
will similarly follow this direction. We first show that it is
sufficient to reduce to single-agent cases.
Lemma 4.4. If for any i ∈N and any product policy π−i,
BRi(π−i) is nonempty, convex, and BRi(·) is upper semi-
continuous (see Lemma D.4 for definitions), then the BR
mapping has a fixed point, and there exists a robust NE.
4.1. Induced Distributionally Robust MDPs
We then develop a framework of induced distributionally ro-
bust MDPs to provide a framework for multi-agent studies.
Definition 4.5 (Induced Distributionally Robust MDP).
Given a distributionally robust Markov game MG
=
(N, S, A, P, r) and an agent i ∈N. The induced distri-
butionally robust MDP of the MG by a joint policy π−i is
defined as Mi(π−i) ≜(S, Ai, Pπ−i, rπ−i), where
(Pπ−i)ai
s ≜
n
X
a−i∈A−i
π−i(a−i|s)P
P ∈P(ai,a−i)
s
o
,
rπ−i(s, ai) ≜
X
a−i∈A−i
π−i(a−i|s)ri(s, (ai, a−i)).
(5)
Clearly, Mi(π−i) is a single-agent distributionally robust
MDP for agent i. Due to rectangularity of P, Pπ−i is
(s, ai)-rectangular, and P
a−i π−i(a−i|s)σP
(ai,a−i)
s
(V ) =
σ(Pπ−i)
ai
s (V ), where σPa
s (V ) ≜minP ∈Pa
s PV is the sup-
port function for a specific state-action pair. Moreover, per
Assumption 4.1, Mi(π−i) is also compact and irreducible,
which reduces the DR-MG to a single-agent problem.
However, even the single-agent average reward robust RL
is not fully studied. Specifically, the most essential tool, its
robust Bellman equation, is not well studied: its solvability
or characterizations of solutions are not yet justified (an in-
correct proof is given in (Wang et al., 2023b) for the single-
agent setting), therefore making the connection between
optimal policies and the robust Bellman equation unclear.
Although a huge body of existing work develops convergent
algorithms for single-agent robust average-reward MDPs,
their convergence guarantees either rely on the incorrect
result in (Wang et al., 2023b), e.g., (Wang et al., 2023c;
Roch et al., 2025a), or bypass its solvability through dis-
counted proxy (Xu et al., 2025b;a; Chatterjee et al., 2024;
Meggendorfer et al., 2025). Moreover, there are no prior
studies on the uniqueness of these solutions. We hence de-
rive the following foundational results under Assumption
4.1 (proofs are deferred to Section D).
Theorem 4.6. Under Assumption 4.1.
(1).
Denote
any worst-case transition kernel w.r.t.
gπ
P by Pw
≜
arg minP∈P gπ
P. Then the gain/bias of (π, Pw) : (gπ
Pw, hπ
Pw)
is the unique solution to the equation:
V (s) =
X
a
π(a|s)(r(s, a) −g + σPa
s (V )).
(6)
The uniqueness is in the sense that, for any solution (g, V ) to
(6), it holds that g = gπ
P, V = hπ
Pw + ce, for some constant
c and e = (1, ..., 1).2
(2). The robust Bellman optimality equation
V (s) = max
a {r(s, a) −g + σPa
s (V )}
(7)
has a unique solution (up to some vector ce).
Our results therefore prove the solvability and uniqueness
of the robust Bellman equation, especially (6), solidifying
the connection between the robust average reward and its
solutions. It allows us to evaluate any policy by solving
a (nonlinear) Bellman equation, while simultaneously cer-
tifying the existence of a worst-case kernel realizing the
robust average reward. Then, the robust Bellman optimality
equation provides a complete characterization of optimality
in irreducible DR-MDPs.
We further highlight that our results are fundamental to char-
acterizing the complicated structure of the average reward.
For instance, it is discussed in (Wang et al., 2023c) that (6)
may have non-unique solutions even up to constant vectors,
which we rule out under Assumption 4.1. Our proof tech-
niques are also different from the non-robust ones, which
rely on the Laurent series of the non-robust average reward
(Puterman, 2014), whereas we directly show that the con-
structed pair (gπ
Pw, hπ
Pw) is a solution.
4.2. Existence of a Nash Equilibrium
With the results derived for single-agent robust Bellman
equations, we can then show the following results.
Theorem 4.7. (1). For any distributionally robust MDP un-
der Assumption 4.1, the optimal policy set arg maxπ gπ
P
is convex.
(2).
For any convergent policy sequences
2Even if there exist multiple worst-case kernels, their gain/bias
are all identical up to ce. We denote this unique solution by hπ
P.
5

Distributionally Robust Markov Games with Average Reward
{πn
−i} →π−i and {µn
i } →µi, if µn
i is an optimal ro-
bust policy of the induced distributionally robust MDP
(S, Ai, Pπn
−i, rπn
−i) for agent i ∈N, then µi is also op-
timal for (S, Ai, Pπ−i, rπ−i).
As BRi(π−i) is the set of optimal robust policies of the
(induced) distributionally robust MDP (S, Ai, Pπ−i, rπ−i),
this result hence directly implies the convexity of BRi(π−i).
And for (2), the inducing policy πn
−i varies, resulting in a dis-
tributionally robust MDP sequence with different dynamics.
Hence, we need to reveal the equicontinuity and uniform
convergence of induced distributionally robust MDPs. Simi-
larly, this proof relies on Theorem 4.6.
We highlight that the proof is not a direct extension from
its counterpart under the discounted reward, as we need to
tackle the non-contraction of the Bellman equation, whereas
the discounted Bellman equation is a contraction and admits
a unique solution. Also, compared to non-robust studies, we
need to additionally tackle the non-linearity and uncertainty
transition kernel introduced by the worst-case consideration.
We also highlight that our proof heavily relies on the solv-
ability and uniqueness (up to constant vectors) of (6), which
enables us to fully characterize the optimal policies through
the robust Bellman optimality equation. For instance, for
convexity, when interpolating between two optimal poli-
cies π1 and π2, the corresponding worst-case kernel P w
could shift and differ from the ones of π1 and π2. Our re-
sults, however, ensure that the intersection of the optimality
half-spaces remains convex, despite the kernel shift and the
concave nature of the robust operator.
Combining all of the above results, we can finally show
the existence of a Nash Equilibrium, which is the most
fundamental property of the game.
Theorem 4.8 (Existence of a Nash Equilibrium). Under
Assumption 4.1, a robust Nash equilibrium exists.
5. NE of Weakly Communicating DR-MGs
In this section, we extend our existence result from irre-
ducible DR-MGs to a more general class of weakly commu-
nicating DR-MGs. The weakly communicating assumption
is known to be the weakest standard structural assumption
under which efficient algorithms and sharp structural results
are available for average-reward control; see, e.g., (Wikecek
& Altman, 2015; Bertsekas, 2007; Wan et al., 2021).
Assumption 5.1 (Weakly communicating DR-MG). The
uncertainty set P is convex and compact. Moreover, for any
i and π−i and any transition kernel P ∈P, the state space
can be decomposed as S = Si
0 ∪Si
1, with Si
0 ∩Si
1 = ∅,
such that: (1). Every state in Si
0 is transient under every
stationary joint policy; (2). For any two states s, s′ ∈Si
1,
there exist a stationary policy πi such that P
 SN = s′ |
S0 = s, (πi, π−i), P

> 0 for some N. Additionally, for
any π−i, the corresponding optimal robust Bellman equation
(7) has a unique solution (up to constant shifts).
Remark 5.2. The uniqueness of the optimal bias function
(up to a constant shift) is a standard requirement in average-
reward settings (Wan et al., 2021). We emphasize that this
condition only applies to the optimal robust Bellman equa-
tion, not the Bellman equation for every policy π; thus it is
strictly weaker than the unichain assumption. A weakly
communicating robust MDP can fail to be unichain while
still having a unique optimal bias function. This uniqueness
is critical as it ensures our proxy map Gi(π−i) (defined
subsequently) is well-defined and upper hemicontinuous
(proved in the Appendix), preventing discontinuous jumps
in the maximizer sets Ms(π−i) that would occur if multiple
distinct bias solutions existed.
As in the non-robust case, weakly communicating is strictly
weaker than irreducibility: it only requires accessibility un-
der some policy, rather than under all joint policies. Under
Assumption 5.1, only the optimal robust average reward
g⋆
P(s) is constant across initial states, whereas the robust
average reward gπ
P(s) of a general stationary policy π may
depend on s (Puterman, 2014; Atia et al., 2021; Wang & Si,
2025; Feinberg & Shwartz, 2012). The solvability guaran-
tees for weakly communicating robust Bellman equations
are weaker (Wan et al., 2021; Wan & Sutton, 2022; Wan
et al., 2024). There is no understanding on the Bellman
equation for a fixed policy in (6), and the solvability of the
robust Bellman optimality equation was recently established
by (Wang & Si, 2025) as follows.
Lemma 5.3. (Wang & Si, 2025) Under Assumption 5.1,
the optimal robust Bellman equation
V (s) = max
a∈A
n
r(s, a) −g + σPa
s (V )
o
,
s ∈S, (8)
admits a solution (g⋆, h⋆), with g⋆= g⋆
P(ρ) equal to the
optimal robust average reward for any initial distribution ρ.
Compared with the irreducible case (Theorem 4.6), these
results are strictly weaker. Theorem 4.6 gives solvability of
the robust Bellman equation for every stationary policy π,
as well as a tight correspondence between optimal policies
and solutions of the optimal Bellman equation. Under As-
sumption 5.1, Lemma 5.3 guarantees solvability only for the
optimal equation (8); The equation associated with a fixed
policy π may fail to have a solution, and one can no longer
characterize optimal policies solely via the Bellman equa-
tions. As a consequence, the proof strategy of irreducible
DR-MGs cannot be directly reused.
Remark 5.4. The uniqueness part in Assumption 5.1 is also
assumed in non-robust settings, e.g., (Wan et al., 2021),
which is used to ensure convergence stability. Notably, the
commonly used unichain assumption (Wang et al., 2023b;c)
satisfies this uniqueness (see Lemma E.1).
6

Distributionally Robust Markov Games with Average Reward
To study the NE of weakly communicating DR-MGs, we
construct a proxy set-valued map, derived from solutions
of the optimal robust Bellman equation, and show that
this map is contained in the true best-response map. Fix
a player i and a stationary joint policy π−i of all other
players, and consider the induced single-agent DR-MDP
Mi(π−i) = (S, Ai, Pπ−i, rπ−i
i
). Applying Lemma 5.3 to
Mi(π−i) yields a unique solution (g⋆
π−i, h⋆
π−i) of the opti-
mal Bellman equation, with g⋆
π−i equal to the optimal robust
average reward.
For each s ∈S and any ν ∈∆(Ai) of player i, we define
the one-step Bellman functional F π−i
s
(ν) as
X
ai∈Ai
ν(ai)

rπ−i
i
(s, ai) −g⋆
π−i + σ(P
π−i
s,ai )(h⋆
π−i)

,
(9)
where rπ−i
i
(s, ai) and (Pπ−i
s,ai) is the induced uncertainty
slice at (s, ai). Intuitively, F π−i
s
(ν) is the robust one-step
Bellman return at state s when player i plays ν(· | s) and
the others follow π−i. We then define the Bellman-greedy
response set of player i w.r.t. π−i by
Gi(π−i) ≜

ν ∈Πi|ν(s) = arg
max
µ∈∆(Ai) F π−i
s
(µ), ∀s
	
.
Thus, Gi(π−i) consists of stationary policies that are point-
wise maximizers of the optimal Bellman right-hand side for
the induced DR-MDP Mi(π−i).
Different from the irreducible case, we show a slightly
weaker result Gi(π−i) ⊆BRi(π−i), i.e., Gi(π−i) is a sub-
set of the best-response set, which is sufficient to establish
existence of Nash equilibria.
Finally, define the joint map G(π) ≜×i∈N Gi(π−i) on
the product policy space. If each Gi satisfies the condi-
tions of Kakutani’s fixed-point theorem (Lemma D.4), then
G admits a fixed point π⋆∈G(π⋆), and the inclusion
Gi(π−i) ⊆BRi(π−i) guarantees that this π⋆is also a fixed
point of the best-response map BR and hence a robust NE.
We summarize our main results in the next theorem, whose
proofs are deferred to Appendix E.
Theorem 5.5 (NE of weakly communicating DR-MGs).
Suppose the average-reward DR-MG satisfies Assump-
tion 5.1, then it has a stationary robust Nash equilibrium.
Our results hence imply that DR-MGs with an average re-
ward are also solvable under the weakly communicating
settings. Different from irreducible cases, our proof tech-
niques are fundamentally different and rely on the strong
duality and span bound developed in (Wang & Si, 2025),
and are deferred to Appendix E.
6. Algorithmic Solutions
In this section, we develop algorithmic solutions for irre-
ducible average-reward DR-MGs under Assumption 4.1.
Notably, finding a stationary NE is significantly challenging
in general-sum games, even under non-robust settings (Hu
& Wellman, 2003; Li et al., 2007; Li, 2003; Zinkevich et al.,
2005; Deng et al., 2023; Daskalakis et al., 2023).
6.1. Nash Iteration
Value-iteration has been extensively studied in algorithmic
Markov game studies (Hu & Wellman, 2003; Li et al., 2007;
Li, 2003; Liu et al., 2021; Shi et al., 2024; Farhat et al.,
2026). We hence first develop a robust Nash iteration al-
gorithm (Algorithm 2) for average reward DR-MGs. Our
algorithm generally extends the standard Nash iteration al-
gorithm to the robust average reward setting: it maintains
an estimation, Qi, for all agents, and in each step, the algo-
rithm finds a Nash Equilibrium for the matrix-form game
{Qi(s, a, h0
i )}, i ∈N through an oracle NE. Notably, due
to the non-uniqueness of Nash Equilibria and the compli-
cated structure of general-sum MGs, the algorithm is not
guaranteed to converge if an arbitrary oracle NE is used,
even in non-robust MGs (Li, 2003; Hu & Wellman, 2003;
Littman, 2001; Bowling & Veloso, 2001; Bowling, 2000).
Notably, these assumptions hold for a variety of games, in-
cluding potential Markov games (Leonardos et al., 2022) or
cooperative DR-MGs (Wang et al., 2022b). We thus adopt
additional assumptions and derive the guarantee.
Theorem 6.1. Under Assumption 4.1 and Assumption G.1
(in Appendix), Algorithm 2 converges to a robust NE.
6.2. Robust TD Descent Algorithm
Despite the convergence guarantee we obtained in The-
orem 6.1, the algorithm suffers from two disadvantages.
Firstly, the convergence is only guaranteed with additional
assumptions, which are standard but may not hold generally
(Filar & Vrieze, 1996); Moreover, in each step, Algorithm 2
solves for a NE of a matrix game, which can be PPAD-
complete in the worst case (Daskalakis et al., 2009; Chen
et al., 2009). Although assuming such an oracle is also
standard in Markov game studies (Liu et al., 2021; Hu &
Wellman, 2003; Shi et al., 2024), we are motivated to find
other algorithms with better computational complexity.
In this section, we propose another algorithm to address
these two disadvantages. Our algorithm is based on an
equivalent characterization of the robust NE in terms of the
temporal difference (TD) errors, inspired by non-robust stud-
ies of MGs (Sahabandu et al., 2024; Sobel, 1971). Specif-
ically, given a joint policy π and any (gk, Vk) ∈R × RS,
define the k-th player’s TD error as
ΩR
k (s, ak; π−k | gk, Vk) ≜gk + Vk(s)
(10)
−
X
a−k
π−k(a−k | s)

rk(s, ak, a−k) + σP
(ak,a−k)
s
(Vk)

;
And for (π, g = (g1, ..., gN), V = (V1, ..., VN)), define the
7

Distributionally Robust Markov Games with Average Reward
global robust TD gap ∆R(π, g, V ) as
∆R(π, g, V )
≜
X
k∈N ,s∈S,ak
πk(ak | s) ΩR
k (s, ak; π−k | gk, Vk),
(11)
We then develop a TD-based characterization of robust NE
as follows.
Theorem 6.2. Denote L(π) ≜∆R
 π, g⋆(π), V ⋆(π)

,
where g⋆(π)k and V ⋆(π)k is the solution to the optimal
Bellman equation of the induced RMDP Mk(π−k). Then,
for every π ∈Π, L(π) ≥0. Moreover, L(π) = 0 if and
only if π is a stationary robust Nash equilibrium.
This result shows that the global robust TD gap, L, plays the
role of a potential function for robust Nash equilibria: its
global minimizer is a NE. This viewpoint motivates using
L as the objective of our TD-based algorithm: each iter-
ation tries to reduce the global TD gap, and convergence
to L = 0 corresponds exactly to convergence to a robust
Nash equilibrium. However, due to the worst-case consider-
ation in robustness, the function L is generally non-smooth,
whose analysis can be extremely challenging. Toward this,
we propose a smoothed proxy Lλ of it by considering its
Moreau envelop (Moreau, 1965; Wang et al., 2023a; 2025)
(discussions are deferred to Section H.3). We note that when
λ →0, the NE of the smoothed proxy approximates the
robust NE of the original DR-MG, hence minimizing Lλ
with a small λ approximately finds a robust NE. Toward
this, we develop a two-time-scale algorithm as follows.
Algorithm 1 Robust TD Descent
1: Input: step sizes {ηn}, {αn}, smoothing λ > 0
2: Initialize π0 ∈Π, (g0, V 0) ∈G × V
3: for n = 0, 1, 2, . . . do
4:
Fast scale:
(gn+ 1
2 , V n+ 1
2 )
←
ΓG×V

(gn, V n) −αn∇(g,V )Lλ(πn, gn, V n)

5:
Slow scale:
πn+1
←
ΓΠ

πn
−
ηn∇πLλ(πn, gn+ 1
2 , V n+ 1
2 )

6:
(gn+1, V n+1) ←(gn+ 1
2 , V n+ 1
2 )
7: end for
In the algorithm, Γ denotes the projection operator in Eu-
clidean norm. A more detailed discussion of the algorithm
is in Section H. Compared to Algorithm 2, which relies
on a span-seminorm contraction analysis and requires a
PPAD-complete NE computing subroutine, Algorithm 1 by-
passes the NE oracle requirement entirely. While the joint
action space computation grows exponentially in N, our
framework can efficiently exploit factored action spaces or
local interactions, since the effective space can be much
smaller. Furthermore, the inner-loop minimization over
the ambiguity set (σPa
s (V )) is highly tractable for standard
divergence-based uncertainty sets (e.g., O(|S| log |S|) for
KL-divergence via water-filling algorithm, or a closed-form
solution in O(|S|) for Total-variation (Nilim & El Ghaoui,
2003)). Thus, the per-iteration complexity remains polyno-
mial in the size of the DR-MG parameters (see Section H),
making Algorithm 1 significantly more practical and feasi-
ble.
We then present our convergence results.
Theorem 6.3. Assume the DR-MG satisfies Assumption 4.1
and step sizes satisfy the Robbins-Monro condition. Then
{πn} weakly converges to a stationary point of Lλ.
Our results imply the convergence of Algorithm 1 to a sta-
tionary point of Lλ (note that any NE is a stationary point).
Such a result is weaker than the convergence guarantee of
Algorithm 2, yet it does not require any additional assump-
tions on the game structure or NE-computing oracle, hence
standing as the first practical algorithm for average reward
DR-MGs with provable convergence guarantees.
Remark 6.4. We highlight that, finding the exact NE even
in standard general-sum Markov games is significantly chal-
lenging without additional structural assumptions (Zhang
et al., 2024a; Deng et al., 2023; Jin et al., 2023). Unlike stan-
dard non-robust Markov games, the set of stationary points
for DR-MGs does not necessarily coincide with the set of ro-
bust Nash Equilibria due to the inherent non-smoothness of
the worst-case objective. Because the robust value function
involves a min over the uncertainty set, gradient domination
does not hold in general for DR-MGs.
However, any global minimizer of Lλ (with value 0) is an
exact NE of the λ-smoothed robust game. As λ →0 in
the original game, the smoothed TD errors converge to the
original errors. Thus, for a sufficiently small λ, an approxi-
mate NE of the smoothed game translates to an O(λ + ϵ)-
approximate NE of the original DR-MG. Our robust TD al-
gorithm converges to a stationary point of Lλ, which serves
as a necessary first step toward finding a robust NE in ro-
bust average-reward environments. We leave explorations
of local gradient domination for the smoothed game un-
der strict equilibrium assumptions for stronger convergence
guarantees as future work.
7. Connections with Discounted DR-NE
In this section, we study the connection between distribu-
tionally robust games with discounted and average rewards.
Our motivation is to utilize the extensively studied and math-
ematical elegance of the discounted setting to solve the more
challenging average-reward setting. Recall that a policy π⋆
γ
8

Distributionally Robust Markov Games with Average Reward
is a Nash Equilibrium of the γ-discounted DR-MG if
V π⋆
P,i(ρ) ≥V
(π⋆
−i,πi)
P,i
(ρ), ∀i ∈N, ∀πi,
(12)
where V π⋆
P,i(ρ) is the γ-discounted robust value function. A
policy π⋆is an ϵ-Nash Equilibrium, if
gπ⋆
P,i(ρ) + ϵ ≥g
(π⋆
−i,πi)
P,i
(ρ), ∀i ∈N, ∀πi,
(13)
We then derive the following results under Assumption 4.1.
Theorem 7.1. (1). For any discount factor γ ∈[0, 1),
denote a Nash Equilibrium of the γ-discounted DR-MG
by πγ. Then any cluster point π of {πγ}γ∈[0,1) is a Nash
Equilibrium of the average reward DR-MG.
(2). For any ϵ, there exists some discount factor γ, such that
any ϵ-Nash Equilibrium of the γ-discounted DR-MG is also
an O(ϵ)-Nash Equilibrium under the average reward.
This theorem establishes a crucial bridge between the dis-
counted and average reward criteria in DR-MGs. Specifi-
cally, we showed that the worst-case long-run average be-
havior of a multi-agent system can be approximated by its
discounted behavior when the future is valued almost as
much as the present (i.e., as γ →1). Moreover, we provide
a concrete choice of such a factor γ in Section 7 to validate
the approximation approach. It also provides significant
computational implications. The analysis of γ-discounted
games is often more tractable (Kardes¸ et al., 2011), bene-
fiting from properties like the Banach fixed-point theorem,
which guarantees the existence and uniqueness of value
functions. Many reinforcement learning and game theory
algorithms, such as Q-learning and policy gradient, can be
applied for the discounted setting (Zhang et al., 2020). This
result therefore assures us that for any desired level of ac-
curacy ϵ, we can simply select a single discount factor γ
sufficiently close to 1 and solve for this γ-discounted game.
8. Conclusion
In this paper, we developed a comprehensive framework
for distributionally robust Markov games under the average-
reward criterion, a setting critical for multi-agent systems
requiring long-term reliability in the face of severe model
uncertainty. We proved the existence of a stationary Nash
Equilibrium under both irreducible and weakly communi-
cating settings, and proposed two practical algorithms as the
first provably convergent methods for average reward DR-
MGs. We also connected average-reward equilibria to their
discounted counterparts, enabling their tractable approxima-
tion via robust equilibria with large discount factors.
Limitations and Future Works. Our complete theoretical
framework and algorithmic blueprint opens several inter-
esting directions for future study. First, exploring local
gradient domination under a strict equilibrium assumption
could yield local finite-time convergence guarantees for
the smoothed objective. Second, extending this framework
beyond (s, a)-rectangularity would allow us to handle state-
coupled ambiguity. Finally, while our formulation models
uncertainty as a player-specific environment, investigating
fully shared worst-case kernels (e.g., robust cooperative
games or robust Stackelberg games, where nature acts as ad-
versarial leader) presents a fascinating challenge for future
research on multi-agent robust optimization.
Acknowledgments
This work was supported by DARPA under Agreement No.
HR0011-24-9-0427, and an Amazon Research Award, Fall
2025. Any opinions, findings, and conclusions or recom-
mendations expressed in this material are those of the au-
thor(s) and do not reflect the views of DARPA or Amazon.
Impact Statement
This paper presents work whose goal is to advance the
field of Machine Learning, specifically robust reinforcement
learning. There are many potential societal consequences of
our work; however, since we provide a general framework,
we do not feel that there is a need to highlight these.
References
Atia, G. K., Beckus, A., Alkhouri, I., and Velasquez, A.
Steady-state planning in expected reward multichain
mdps. Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research, 72:
1029–1082, 2021.
Bagnell, J. A., Ng, A., and Schneider, J. G. Solving uncer-
tain Markov decision processes. 2001.
Berge, C.
Topological spaces: Including a treatment
of multi-valued functions, vector spaces and convexity.
Oliver & Boyd, 1877.
Bertsekas, D. P. Dynamic Programming and Optimal Con-
trol 3rd edition, volume II. Belmont, MA: Athena Scien-
tific, 2007.
Blanchet, J., Lu, M., Zhang, T., and Zhong, H. Double
pessimism is provably efficient for distributionally robust
offline reinforcement learning: Generic algorithm and
robust partial coverage. In Proc. Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), volume 36,
2023.
Bowling, M. Convergence problems of general-sum multia-
gent reinforcement learning. In ICML, pp. 89–94, 2000.
Bowling, M. H. and Veloso, M. M. Rational and convergent
learning in stochastic games. In Nebel, B. (ed.), Proceed-
9

Distributionally Robust Markov Games with Average Reward
ings of the Seventeenth International Joint Conference on
Artificial Intelligence (IJCAI), pp. 1021–1026. Morgan
Kaufmann, 2001.
Bukharin, A., Li, Y., Yu, Y., Zhang, Q., Chen, Z., Zuo,
S., Zhang, C., Zhang, S., and Zhao, T. Robust multi-
agent reinforcement learning via adversarial regulariza-
tion: Theoretical foundation and stable algorithms. In
Proc. Advances in Neural Information Processing Sys-
tems (NeurIPS), volume 36, 2023.
Chatterjee, K., Goharshady, E. K., Karrabi, M., Novotn´y,
P., and Zikelic, D.
Solving long-run average reward
robust mdps via stochastic games. In Proceedings of the
Thirty-Third International Joint Conference on Artificial
Intelligence (IJCAI), pp. 6707–6715. ijcai.org, 2024.
Chen, X., Deng, X., and Teng, S.-H. Settling the complexity
of computing two-player nash equilibria. Journal of the
ACM (JACM), 56(3):1–57, 2009.
Chen, Z., Wang, S., and Si, N. Sample complexity of distri-
butionally robust average-reward reinforcement learning.
In The Thirty-ninth Annual Conference on Neural Infor-
mation Processing Systems, 2025.
Daskalakis, C., Goldberg, P. W., and Papadimitriou, C. H.
The complexity of computing a nash equilibrium. Com-
munications of the ACM, 52(2):89–97, 2009.
Daskalakis, C., Golowich, N., and Zhang, K. The com-
plexity of markov equilibrium in stochastic games. In
Proc. Annual Conference on Learning Theory (CoLT), pp.
4180–4234. PMLR, 2023.
Deng, X., Li, N., Mguni, D., Wang, J., and Yang, Y. On the
complexity of computing markov perfect equilibrium in
general-sum stochastic games. National Science Review,
10(1), 2023.
Farhat, Z. U., Ghosh, D., Atia, G. K., and Wang, Y. Sample-
efficient distributionally robust multi-agent reinforcement
learning via online interaction, 2026. URL https://
arxiv.org/abs/2508.02948.
Feinberg, E. A. and Shwartz, A. Handbook of Markov
decision processes: methods and applications, volume 40.
Springer Science & Business Media, 2012.
Filar, J. and Vrieze, K. Competitive Markov decision pro-
cesses. Springer-Verlag, Berlin, Heidelberg, 1996. ISBN
0387948058.
Fink, A. M. Equilibrium in a stochastic n-person game.
Journal of science of the hiroshima university, series ai
(mathematics), 28(1):89–93, 1964.
Fudenberg, D. and Tirole, J. Game theory (3. pr.). MIT
Press, 1991. ISBN 978-0-262-06141-4.
Grand-Cl´ement, J. and Petrik, M. Reducing blackwell and
average optimality to discounted MDPs via the black-
well discount factor. In Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2023.
Grand-Clement, J., Petrik, M., and Vieille, N. Beyond
discounted returns: Robust markov decision processes
with average and blackwell optimality. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2312.03618, 2023.
Guo, X. and Hern´andez-Lerma, O. Zero-sum games for
continuous-time markov chains with unbounded transi-
tion and average payoff rates. Journal of Applied Prob-
ability, 40(2):327–345, 2003. ISSN 00219002. URL
http://www.jstor.org/stable/3215794.
Guo, X. and Yang, J. A new condition and approach for zero-
sum stochastic games with average payoffs. Stochastic
analysis and applications, 26(3):537–561, 2008.
Hern´andez-Lerma, O. and Lasserre, J. B. Zero-sum stochas-
tic games in borel spaces: average payoff criteria. SIAM
Journal on Control and Optimization, 39(5):1520–1539,
2000.
Hu, J. and Wellman, M. P. Nash q-learning for general-sum
stochastic games. Journal of machine learning research,
4(Nov):1039–1069, 2003.
IWASE, S., TANAKA, K., and WAKUTA, K. On Markov
games with the expected average reward criterion. Sci-
ence Reports of Niigata University. Series A, Mathemat-
ics, 13(none):31 – 41, 1976.
Iyengar, G. N. Robust dynamic programming. Mathematics
of Operations Research, 30(2):257–280, 2005.
Ja´skiewicz, A. and Nowak, A. S. On the optimality equation
for zero-sum ergodic stochastic games. Mathematical
methods of operations research, 54:291–301, 2001.
Jiao, Y. and Li, G. Minimax-optimal multi-agent robust
reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.19873,
2024.
Jin, Y., Muthukumar, V., and Sidford, A. The complexity
of infinite-horizon general-sum stochastic games. In 14th
Innovations in Theoretical Computer Science Conference
(ITCS), volume 251 of LIPIcs, pp. 76:1–76:20. Schloss
Dagstuhl - Leibniz-Zentrum f¨ur Informatik, 2023.
Kakutani, S. A generalization of brouwer’s fixed point
theorem. Duke Mathematical Journal, Duke Math. J.
8(3), 1941.
Kardes¸, E., Ord´o˜nez, F., and Hall, R. W. Discounted robust
stochastic games and an application to queueing control.
Operations research, 59(2):365–382, 2011.
10

Distributionally Robust Markov Games with Average Reward
Krnjaic, A., Steleac, R. D., Thomas, J. D., Papoudakis, G.,
Sch¨afer, L., To, A. W. K., Lao, K.-H., Cubuktepe, M.,
Haley, M., B¨orsting, P., et al. Scalable multi-agent rein-
forcement learning for warehouse logistics with robotic
and human co-workers. In 2024 IEEE/RSJ International
Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS), pp.
677–684. IEEE, 2024.
K¨uenle, H.-U. and Schurath, R. The optimality equation
and ε-optimal strategies in markov games with average
reward criterion. Mathematical methods of operations
research, 56:451–471, 2003.
Leonardos, S., Overman, W., Panageas, I., and Piliouras,
G. Global convergence of multi-agent policy gradient
in markov potential games. In The Tenth International
Conference on Learning Representations, (ICLR). Open-
Review.net, 2022.
Li, J. Learning average reward irreducible stochastic games:
Analysis and applications. PhD thesis, University of
South Florida, 2003.
Li, J., Ramachandran, K., and Das, T. K. A reinforcement
learning (nash-r) algorithm for average reward irreducible
stochastic games. Journal of Machine Learning Research,
2007.
Li, N., Zheng, Z., Ni, W., Shan, H., Zhang, W., and Li,
X. Sample-efficient tabular self-play for offline robust
reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2512.00352,
2025.
Littman, M. L. Markov games as a framework for multi-
agent reinforcement learning. In Machine learning pro-
ceedings 1994, pp. 157–163. Elsevier, 1994.
Littman, M. L. Friend-or-foe q-learning in general-sum
games. In Proceedings of the Eighteenth International
Conference on Machine Learning (ICML 2001), pp. 322–
328, 2001.
Liu, Q., Yu, T., Bai, Y., and Jin, C. A sharp analysis of
model-based reinforcement learning with self-play. In
Proc. International Conference on Machine Learning
(ICML), pp. 7001–7010. PMLR, 2021.
Lozovanu, D. Stationary nash equilibria for average stochas-
tic games with finite state and action spaces. Buletinul
Academiei de S¸tiint¸e a Republicii Moldova. Matematica,
81(2):71–92, 2016.
Ma, S., Chen, Z., Zou, S., and Zhou, Y. Decentralized
robust v-learning for solving markov games with model
uncertainty. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 24
(371):1–40, 2023.
Ma, S., Chen, Z., Zhou, Y., and Huang, H. Rectified robust
policy optimization for model-uncertain constrained rein-
forcement learning without strong duality. Trans. Mach.
Learn. Res., 2025, 2025.
McMahan, J., Artiglio, G., and Xie, Q. Roping in uncer-
tainty: Robustness and regularization in markov games.
In Forty-first International Conference on Machine Learn-
ing (ICML). OpenReview.net, 2024.
Meggendorfer, T., Weininger, M., and Wienh¨oft, P. Solv-
ing robust markov decision processes: Generic, reliable,
efficient. In Proc. Conference on Artificial Intelligence
(AAAI), volume 39, pp. 26631–26641, 2025.
Moreau, J.-J. Proximit´e et dualit´e dans un espace hilbertien.
Bulletin de la Soci´et´e math´ematique de France, 93:273–
299, 1965.
Nilim, A. and El Ghaoui, L. Robustness in Markov decision
problems with uncertain transition matrices. In Proc. Ad-
vances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS),
pp. 839–846, 2003.
Nowak, A. S. Optimal strategies in a class of zero-sum
ergodic stochastic games. Mathematical methods of oper-
ations research, 50:399–419, 1999.
Osborne, M. J. An introduction to game theory. Oxford
University Press, 2003. ISBN 9780197583067.
Peake, A., McCalmon, J., Raiford, B., Liu, T., and Alqah-
tani, S. Multi-agent reinforcement learning for cooper-
ative adaptive cruise control. In 2020 IEEE 32nd Inter-
national Conference on Tools with Artificial Intelligence
(ICTAI), pp. 15–22. IEEE, 2020.
Puterman, M. L.
Markov decision processes: discrete
stochastic dynamic programming. John Wiley & Sons,
2014.
Qiu, D., Wang, J., Wang, J., and Strbac, G. Multi-agent
reinforcement learning for automated peer-to-peer energy
trading in double-side auction market. In IJCAI, pp. 2913–
2920, 2021.
Qu, G., Lin, Y., Wierman, A., and Li, N. Scalable multi-
agent reinforcement learning for networked systems with
average reward. Advances in Neural Information Process-
ing Systems, 33:2074–2086, 2020.
Rieder, U. Average optimality in markov games with gen-
eral state space. In Proc. 3rd International Conf. on
Approximation and Optimization. Citeseer, 1995.
Roch, Z., Atia, G., and Wang, Y. A reduction framework
for distributionally robust reinforcement learning under
average reward. In Proc. International Conference on
Machine Learning (ICML). PMLR, 2025a.
11

Distributionally Robust Markov Games with Average Reward
Roch, Z., Zhang, C., Atia, G., and Wang, Y. Provably
sample-efficient robust reinforcement learning with av-
erage reward, 2025b. URL https://arxiv.org/
abs/2505.12462.
Ross, K. A. Elementary analysis. Springer, 2013.
Sahabandu, D., Moothedath, S., Allen, J., Bushnell, L., Lee,
W., and Poovendran, R. Rl-arne: A reinforcement learn-
ing algorithm for computing average reward nash equilib-
rium of nonzero-sum stochastic games. IEEE Transac-
tions on Automatic Control, 69(11):7824–7831, 2024.
Sennott, L. I. Zero-sum stochastic games with unbounded
costs: Discounted and average cost cases. Zeitschrift f¨ur
Operations Research, 39:209–225, 1994.
Shapley, L. S. Stochastic games. Proceedings of the national
academy of sciences, 39(10):1095–1100, 1953.
Shi, L., Mazumdar, E., Chi, Y., and Wierman, A. Sample-
efficient robust multi-agent reinforcement learning in the
face of environmental uncertainty. In Proc. International
Conference on Machine Learning (ICML). PMLR, 2024.
Shi, L., Gai, J., Mazumdar, E., Chi, Y., and Wierman,
A. Breaking the curse of multiagency in robust multi-
agent reinforcement learning. In Forty-second Interna-
tional Conference on Machine Learning (ICML). Open-
Review.net, 2025.
Sobel, M. J. Noncooperative stochastic games. The Annals
of Mathematical Statistics, 42(6):1930–1935, 1971.
Tanaka, K. and Wakuta, K. On continuous time markov
games with the expected average reward criterion. 1977.
Thuijsman, F. A survey on optimality and equilibria in
stochastic games. Maastricht University, 1997.
Vadori, N., Ardon, L., Ganesh, S., Spooner, T., Amrouni,
S., Vann, J., Xu, M., Zheng, Z., Balch, T., and Veloso, M.
Towards multi-agent reinforcement learning-driven over-
the-counter market simulations. Mathematical Finance,
34(2):262–347, 2024.
Wan, Y. and Sutton, R. S. On convergence of average-reward
off-policy control algorithms in weakly communicating
mdps. arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.15141, 2022.
Wan, Y., Naik, A., and Sutton, R. S. Learning and planning
in average-reward markov decision processes. In Proc.
International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML),
pp. 10653–10662. PMLR, 2021.
Wan, Y., Yu, H., and Sutton, R. S.
On conver-
gence of average-reward q-learning in weakly commu-
nicating markov decision processes.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2408.16262, 2024.
Wang, Q., Ho, C. P., and Petrik, M. Policy gradient in
robust mdps with global convergence guarantee. In Proc.
International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML),
pp. 35763–35797. PMLR, 2023a.
Wang, Q., Zha, Y., Ho, C. P., and Petrik, M. Provable
policy gradient for robust average-reward MDPs beyond
rectangularity. In Forty-second International Conference
on Machine Learning (ICML), 2025. URL https://
openreview.net/forum?id=f4CPc211U1.
Wang, S. and Si, N. Bellman optimality of average-reward
robust markov decision processes with a constant gain.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.14203, 2025.
Wang, Y., Miao, F., and Zou, S. Robust constrained rein-
forcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.06866,
2022a.
Wang, Y., Wang, Y., Zhou, Y., Velasquez, A., and Zou, S.
Data-driven robust multi-agent reinforcement learning.
In 2022 IEEE 32nd International Workshop on Machine
Learning for Signal Processing (MLSP), pp. 1–6. IEEE,
2022b.
Wang, Y., Velasquez, A., Atia, G., Prater-Bennette, A., and
Zou, S. Robust average-reward markov decision pro-
cesses. In Proc. Conference on Artificial Intelligence
(AAAI), volume 37, pp. 15215–15223, 2023b.
Wang, Y., Velasquez, A., Atia, G. K., Prater-Bennette, A.,
and Zou, S. Model-free robust average-reward reinforce-
ment learning. In Proc. International Conference on
Machine Learning (ICML), pp. 36431–36469. PMLR,
2023c.
Wang, Y., Velasquez, A., Atia, G., Prater-Bennette, A., and
Zou, S. Robust average-reward reinforcement learning.
Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research, 80:719–803,
2024.
Wikecek, P. and Altman, E. Stationary anonymous sequen-
tial games with undiscounted rewards. Journal of opti-
mization theory and applications, 166(2):686–710, 2015.
Xu, Y., Ganesh, S., and Aggarwal, V. Efficient q-learning
and actor-critic methods for robust average reward rein-
forcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.07040,
2025a.
Xu, Y., Mondal, W. U., and Aggarwal, V. Finite-sample
analysis of policy evaluation for robust average reward
reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.16816,
2025b.
Zhang, K., Sun, T., Tao, Y., Genc, S., Mallya, S., and Basar,
T. Robust multi-agent reinforcement learning with model
uncertainty. In Proc. Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems (NeurIPS), volume 33, 2020.
12

Distributionally Robust Markov Games with Average Reward
Zhang, R., Ren, Z., and Li, N. Gradient play in stochastic
games: stationary points, convergence, and sample com-
plexity. IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control, 69(10):
6499–6514, 2024a.
Zhang, Z., Panaganti, K., Shi, L., Sui, Y., Wierman, A.,
and Yue, Y.
Distributionally robust constrained rein-
forcement learning under strong duality. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2406.15788, 2024b.
Zheng, Z. and Guo, X. Zero-sum non-stationary stochas-
tic games with the long-run average criterion. Applied
Mathematics & Optimization, 90(2):43, 2024.
Zinkevich, M., Greenwald, A., and Littman, M. Cyclic equi-
libria in markov games. Advances in neural information
processing systems, 18, 2005.
13

Distributionally Robust Markov Games with Average Reward
A. Related Works
We discuss related works in this section.
Non-robust Markov Games. Markov Games (Littman, 1994) provide a foundational mathematical framework for multi-
agent sequential decision-making. The majority of early work focused on two-player zero-sum MGs, especially under the
discounted-reward setting. Under these settings, the existence of a stationary Nash Equilibrium was established in (Shapley,
1953) by formulating the problem as a Max-Min problem. It is later extended to multi-player general-sum MGs in (Fink,
1964). The average-reward criterion, while more suitable for systems with long operational horizons, presents greater
analytical challenges. Unlike the discounted case, a stationary NE is not generally guaranteed to exist, even in two-player
zero-sum games (Filar & Vrieze, 1996). Instead, NE existence has only been proven under some additional assumptions on
the structure of the game, including irreducibility, zero-sum (Guo & Yang, 2008; Hern´andez-Lerma & Lasserre, 2000; Guo
& Hern´andez-Lerma, 2003; Zheng & Guo, 2024; Nowak, 1999; IWASE et al., 1976; K¨uenle & Schurath, 2003; Tanaka &
Wakuta, 1977; Ja´skiewicz & Nowak, 2001; Filar & Vrieze, 1996), or single recurrent class under any policy (Sobel, 1971;
Sahabandu et al., 2024). However, these non-robust methods cannot be applied to our robust setting.
Distributionally Robust MDPs. To address the performance degradation that occurs when a model is mis-specified,
(single-agent) distributionally robust MDPs are first developed in (Iyengar, 2005; Nilim & El Ghaoui, 2003) for both
finite horizon and infinite horizon discounted reward settings. Studies under the average reward setting are limited until
recently. In (Wang et al., 2023b;c), fundamental understandings of robust average reward are developed under the unichain
assumption, and is later extended to more general settings like weakly communicating ones (Grand-Clement et al., 2023;
Wang & Si, 2025). A huge body of robust reinforcement learning for average reward is also developed, mainly focusing
on the sample complexity (Xu et al., 2025b;a; Roch et al., 2025b;a; Chen et al., 2025; Grand-Cl´ement & Petrik, 2023;
Chatterjee et al., 2024; Wang et al., 2024). However, single-agent robust MDPs with average reward are still not fully studied
(e.g., uniqueness or solvability of robust Bellman equation are not clear). These works are all developed for single-agent
settings, and do not address the challenges we faced in multi-agent DR-MGs.
Distributionally Robust Markov Games. Extending distributional robustness to the multi-agent setting is a recent and
active area of research. However, the literature has overwhelmingly concentrated on the finite-horizon (Ma et al., 2023;
Shi et al., 2025; 2024; Jiao & Li, 2024; Li et al., 2025; Blanchet et al., 2023; Farhat et al., 2026) and discounted-reward
criteria (Zhang et al., 2020; Kardes¸ et al., 2011). These settings are often more analytically tractable because the influence of
future rewards diminishes, simplifying the analysis. However, none of these methods can be extended to the average-reward
setting, as we discussed earlier.
B. Preliminaries
In this section, we briefly review previous studies of single-agent distributionally robust MDPs.
B.1. Discounted Setting
Under the robust setting, the worst-case performance over the uncertainty set of MDPs is defined through the discounted
reward. More specifically, the robust discounted value function of a policy π for a discounted MDP is defined as
V π
P,γ(s) ≜
min
κ∈×t≥0P Eπ,κ
" ∞
X
t=0
γtrt|S0 = s
#
,
(14)
where κ = (P0, P1...) ∈×t≥0P.
For robust discounted MDPs, it has been shown that the robust discounted value function is the unique fixed-point of the
robust discounted Bellman operator (Nilim & El Ghaoui, 2003; Iyengar, 2005; Puterman, 2014):
TπV (s) ≜
X
a∈A
π(a|s)
 r(s, a) + γσPa
s (V )

,
(15)
where σPa
s (V ) ≜minp∈Pa
s p⊤V is the support function of V on Pa
s . Based on the contraction of Tπ, robust dynamic
programming approaches, e.g., robust value iteration, can be designed (Nilim & El Ghaoui, 2003; Iyengar, 2005).
14

Distributionally Robust Markov Games with Average Reward
The goal is to find the optimal robust policy:
π⋆= arg max
π
V π
P,γ(s),
(16)
and it is shown (Iyengar, 2005) that the optimal robust value function V π⋆
P,γ(s) satisfies the robust Bellman optimality
equation
V (s) ≜max
a

π(a|s)
 r(s, a) + γσPa
s (V )
	
.
(17)
B.2. Average Reward Setting
For a fixed kernel P0, the average reward (or gain) and the bias are defined as
gπ
P0(s) ≜lim inf
n→∞Eπ,P0
"
1
n
n−1
X
t=0
rt|S0 = s
#
(18)
and
hπ
P0(s) ≜Eπ,P0
" ∞
X
t=0
(rt −gπ
P0)|s0 = s
#
.
(19)
We can view equation (19) as the cumulative difference over time t as t →∞. Defining Hπ
P0 ≜(I −Pπ
0 + Pπ
∗)−1(I −Pπ
∗)
as the deviation matrix of Pπ
0, then hπ
P0 = Hπ
P0rπ by (Puterman, 2014). When the MDP is irreducible, (gπ
P0, hπ
P0) is a
solution to the following non-robust Bellman equation (Feinberg & Shwartz, 2012):
hπ
P0(s) = Eπ
"
r(s, a) −gπ
P0(s) +
X
s′∈S
pa
s,s′hπ
P0(s′)
#
.
(20)
In the robust setting, we consider the robust average reward, defined as
gπ
P(s) ≜min
P ∈P lim inf
n→∞Eπ,P
"
1
n
n−1
X
t=0
rt|S0 = s
#
.
(21)
It is shown that under the unichain assumption, the robust average reward is independent from the initial state: gπ
P(s1) =
gπ
P(s2), for any s1, s2. The robust Bellman equation (for a policy π) and the robust optimal Bellman equation for the average
reward setting are derived in (Wang et al., 2023b):
V (s) + g =
X
a
π(a|s)
 r(s, a) + σPa
s (V )

,
(22)
V (s) = max
a

r(s, a) −g + σPa
s (V )
	
,
∀s ∈S.
(23)
It is shown (Wang et al., 2023c) that if the equation (22) ((23)) has a solution (g, V ), then the solution g is the robust average
reward gπ
P (the optimal robust average reward g∗
P = maxπ gπ
P). However, whether these two equations are solvable is not
studied but directly assumed.
C. Proof of Lemma 3.1
We derive the result by constructing an example.
Fix ε ∈(0, 1). Consider a two-player zero-sum distributionally robust Markov game
(S, A1, A2, P, r1, r2),
15

Distributionally Robust Markov Games with Average Reward
with state space S = {s, G, B}, action sets A1 = {1, 2} and A2 = {1, 2}, and rewards
r1(G, a1, a2) = 1,
r1(B, a1, a2) = 0,
r1(s, a1, a2) = 0,
r2 = −r1.
The ambiguity set consists of two kernels p(1) and p(2):
p(1)( · |s, (1, 1)) = δG,
p(1)( · |s, (2, 2)) = ε δG + (1 −ε) δB,
p(2)( · |s, (1, 1)) = ε δG + (1 −ε) δB,
p(2)( · |s, (2, 2)) = δG,
p(1)( · |s, (1, 2)) = δB,
p(1)( · |s, (2, 1)) = δB,
p(2)( · |s, (1, 2)) = δB,
p(2)( · |s, (2, 1)) = δB,
and, for x ∈{G, B}, p(1)( · |x, (a1, a2)) = p(2)( · |x, (a1, a2)) = δx (absorbing). Thus, under any p ∈{p(1), p(2)} the
chain has two closed recurrent classes {G} and {B} (i.e., it is multi-chain).
Let the initial state be S0 = s. For stationary policies π1 ∈∆(A1), π2 ∈∆(A2), we specify them as
π1(1) = p ∈[0, 1],
π2(1) = q ∈[0, 1].
Because G, B are absorbing and r1 ∈{0, 1} on {G, B}, the average reward of player 1 equals the probability (under the
chosen kernel) of transitioning from s to G in one step. Thus we have that
U(p, q) ≜
min
k∈{1,2} Pp(k)
 S1 = G
 S0 = s, π1, π2

= min

p q + ε(1 −p)(1 −q), ε p q + (1 −p)(1 −q)
	
.
Then the robust average reward for player 1 is U(p, q) and for player 2 is −U(p, q).
Lemma C.1. For U defined above and any ε ∈(0, 1),
sup
p∈[0,1]
inf
q∈[0,1] U(p, q) = ε
2,
inf
q∈[0,1]
sup
p∈[0,1]
U(p, q) =
ε
1 + ε.
Proof. Fix p ∈[0, 1]. For q ∈[0, 1], U(p, q) is the pointwise minimum of two affine functions of q, hence concave in q.
Therefore the infimum over q is attained at an endpoint:
inf
q∈[0,1] U(p, q) = min{ U(p, 0), U(p, 1) } = min{ε(1 −p), εp} = ε min{p, 1 −p}.
Maximizing over p gives
sup
p∈[0,1]
inf
q∈[0,1] U(p, q) = sup
p∈[0,1]
ε min{p, 1 −p} = ε · 1
2 = ε
2.
Fix q ∈[0, 1]. As a function of p, U(p, q) is again the pointwise minimum of two affine functions, hence concave and
piecewise linear with a single kink at the solution of equality:
p q + ε(1 −p)(1 −q) = εp q + (1 −p)(1 −q) ⇐⇒p = 1 −q.
Thus
sup
p∈[0,1]
U(p, q) = max
n
U(0, q), U(1, q), U(1 −q, q)
o
= max
n
ε(1 −q), εq, (1 + ε)q(1 −q)
o
.
Hence
inf
q∈[0,1]
sup
p∈[0,1]
U(p, q) = min
q∈[0,1] max
n
ε(1 −q), εq, (1 + ε)q(1 −q)
o
.
Denote f(q) ≜max
n
ε(1−q), εq, (1+ε)q(1−q)
o
. Then since f(q) = f(1−q), it suffices to only consider q ∈[0, 0.5].
Clearly, the minimum of f is achieved at q∗=
ε
1+ε, with f(q∗) =
ε
1+ε.
Theorem C.2 (Nonexistence of a Nash equilibrium). For the robust Markov game above, no (stationary stochastic) Nash
equilibrium exists.
16

Distributionally Robust Markov Games with Average Reward
Proof. In a two-player zero-sum game, a stationary Nash equilibrium (p⋆, q⋆) is a saddle point:
U(p⋆, q) ≥U(p⋆, q⋆) ≥U(p, q⋆)
∀p, q ∈[0, 1],
which implies
inf
q U(p⋆, q) = U(p⋆, q⋆) = sup
p U(p, q⋆).
Consequently,
sup
p inf
q U(p, q) ≥inf
q U(p⋆, q) = U(p⋆, q⋆) = sup
p U(p, q⋆) ≥inf
q sup
p U(p, q),
so a saddle requires supp infq U = infq supp U. By Lemma C.1, supp infq U = ε/2 while infq supp U =
ε
1+ε >
ε
2,
leading to a contradiction. Hence no saddle point exists and no Nash equilibrium exists.
D. Irreducible DR-MGs
In this appendix we work in the single-agent setting and fix a stationary policy π. The state space S and action space A are
finite. For each (s, a), the local ambiguity set Pa
s ⊂∆(S) is nonempty, compact and convex, and the overall ambiguity set
is the rectangular product
P = ×(s,a)∈S×APa
s .
For each P ∈P, we denote by P π the induced Markov kernel on S:
P π(s′ | s) =
X
a∈A
π(a | s)P(s′ | s, a).
Under Assumption 4.1, P π is irreducible for every stationary π and for every P ∈P.
For fixed P and π, the average reward (gain) and bias are defined as
gπ
P (s) = lim inf
n→∞Eπ,P
"
1
n
n−1
X
t=0
rt
 S0 = s
#
,
hπ
P (s) = Eπ,P
" ∞
X
t=0
 rt −gπ
P

 S0 = s
#
.
By irreducibility, gπ
P (s) does not depend on s, so we write simply gπ
P ; moreover (gπ
P , hπ
P ) is a solution to the (non-robust)
Poisson/Bellman equation (Puterman, 2014):
gπ
P + hπ
P (s) = rπ(s) +
X
s′∈S
P π(s′ | s) hπ
P (s′),
s ∈S,
(24)
unique up to an additive constant on the bias.
We define the robust average reward of π as
gπ
P ≜min
P ∈P gπ
P .
Compactness of P and continuity of P 7→gπ
P (see, e.g., (Puterman, 2014), Prop. 8.4.6) imply that the minimum is attained:
there exists at least one worst-case kernel
P w ∈arg min
P ∈P gπ
P .
For each state s and action a, define the local robust one-step operator
σa
s(v) ≜min
p∈Pa
s
p⊤v,
v ∈RS,
and the π-averaged robust Bellman operator
σπ
s (v) ≜min
P ∈P
X
s′∈S
P π(s′ | s)v(s′) = min
p∈Pπ
s
p⊤v,
where Pπ
s ≜
P
a π(a | s) pa : pa ∈Pa
s
	
. We also use rπ, σπ(v) to denote S-dimensional vectors, with entry rπ(s) =
P
a π(a|s)r(s, a) and σπ(v)(s) = P
a π(a|s)σPa
s (v).
17

Distributionally Robust Markov Games with Average Reward
Theorem D.1. Consider an uncertainty set P satisfying Assumption 4.1 and fix a stationary policy π. Let P w ∈
arg minP ∈P gπ
P be any worst-case kernel, and let (gπ
P w, hπ
P w) be the corresponding (non-robust) gain and bias, i.e.
a solution to (24) with P = P w. Then the pair (gπ
P, hπ
P w) solves the robust Bellman equation
gπ
P + h(s) = rπ(s) + σπ
s (h),
s ∈S,
(25)
and is unique up to addition of a constant to h. Equivalently, writing V = h and rearranging, V satisfies
V (s) =
X
a∈A
π(a | s)
 r(s, a) −gπ
P + σa
s(V )

,
s ∈S.
Proof. Fix π and let P w be any worst-case kernel for the robust average reward, so gπ
P = gπ
P w. By the irreducible
average-reward MDP theory (Puterman, 2014), there exists a bias hπ
P w such that
gπ
P w + hπ
P w(s) = rπ(s) +
X
s′
P wπ(s′ | s)hπ
P w(s′),
s ∈S.
(26)
Now fix any vector v ∈RS and define a kernel P v ∈P by taking, independently for each state s,
P v,π(· | s) ∈arg min
p∈Pπ
s
p⊤v,
which exists by compactness of Pπ
s . In particular, for v = hπ
P w we define P V ≜P hπ
P w so that
σπ
s (hπ
P w) =
X
s′
P V π(s′ | s) hπ
P w(s′),
s ∈S.
By Assumption 4.1, P V π is irreducible.
For the kernel P V , denote by (gπ
P V , hπ
P V ) the corresponding non-robust gain/bias pair. It satisfies
gπ
P V + hπ
P V (s) = rπ(s) +
X
s′
P V π(s′ | s) hπ
P V (s′),
s ∈S.
(27)
Rewriting (26)-(27) in vector form yields
(I −P wπ)hπ
P w = rπ −gπ
P we,
(I −P V π)hπ
P V = rπ −gπ
P V e.
Since P w is worst-case for π, we have gπ
P w ≤gπ
P V , and hence
(I −P wπ)hπ
P w = rπ −gπ
P we ≥rπ −gπ
P V e = (I −(P V )π)hπ
P V .
(28)
Equivalently,
(P wπ −I)hπ
P w ≤(P V π −I)hπ
P V .
By the definition of P V as a minimizer for hπ
P w we also have, componentwise,
P V πhπ
P w ≤P wπhπ
P w.
(29)
Let x ≜hπ
P w −hπ
P V . Using (28) and adding/subtracting P V πhπ
P w we obtain
x = hπ
P w −hπ
P V ≥P wπhπ
P w −P V πhπ
P V
= P V πhπ
P w −P V πhπ
P V +
 P wπhπ
P w −P V πhπ
P w

= P V πx +
 P wπhπ
P w −P V πhπ
P w

.
By (29) the last term is componentwise nonnegative, so
x ≥P V πx.
18

Distributionally Robust Markov Games with Average Reward
Since P V π is irreducible and stochastic, the inequality x ≥P V πx forces x to be constant, as we prove as follows.
let s⋆be a state with minimal coordinate x(s⋆) = mins x(s). Then for any k ≥1,
x(s⋆) ≥
X
s
(P V π)k(s⋆, s) x(s) ≥x(s⋆)
X
s
(P V π)k(s⋆, s) = x(s⋆),
so all inequalities must be equalities. Thus whenever (P V π)k(s⋆, s′) > 0 we must have x(s′) = x(s⋆). By irreducibility,
every state is reachable from s⋆under some power of P V π, so x is constant: x = ce for some c ∈R, i.e.,
hπ
P w = hπ
P V + c e.
(30)
Using (30) in the Poisson equation (27) for P V gives
gπ
P V + hπ
P w(s) = gπ
P V + hπ
P V (s) + c = rπ(s) +
X
s′
P V π(s′ | s) hπ
P V (s′) + c
= rπ(s) +
X
s′
P V π(s′ | s) hπ
P w(s′).
Equivalently,
gπ
P V + hπ
P w(s) = rπ(s) + (P V πhπ
P w)(s).
(31)
By construction of P V we have
(P V πhπ
P w)(s) = σπ
s (hπ
P w).
On the other hand, from the Poisson equation (26) for P w,
gπ
P w + hπ
P w(s) = rπ(s) + (P wπhπ
P w)(s) ≥rπ(s) + (P V πhπ
P w)(s) = gπ
P V + hπ
P w(s),
where the inequality uses the minimizing property of P V for hπ
P w. Thus gπ
P w ≥gπ
P V . Since P w is worst-case, gπ
P w ≤gπ
P V ,
and we conclude that gπ
P w = gπ
P V .
Combining this equality with (31), and recalling that gπ
P w = gπ
P, we obtain
gπ
P + hπ
P w(s) = rπ(s) + σπ
s (hπ
P w),
which is exactly (25) with h = hπ
P w. Thus, the equation is solvable.
We then show the uniqueness part.
Suppose (g, h) is any solution of (25). For any kernel P ∈P, we have that
σπ
s (h) =
X
a
π(a|s)σa
s(h) ≤P πh,
(32)
hence
g + h(s) ≤rπ(s) + (P πh)(s),
(33)
or
(I −P π)h ≤rπ(s) −ge.
(34)
For this kernel P, let (gπ
P , hπ
P ) be the (unique) solution to the non-robust Bellman equation
(I −P π)hπ
P = rπ −gπ
P e.
(35)
We thus have that
(I −P π)(h −hπ
P ) ≤(gπ
P −g)e.
(36)
19

Distributionally Robust Markov Games with Average Reward
Let µP be the unique stationary distribution of P π, and multiply (36) with µ⊤
P , we have that
0 = µ⊤
P (I −P π)(h −hπ
P ) ≤(gπ
P −g).
(37)
Thus g ≤gπ
P for any P ∈P, i.e.,
g ≤gπ
P.
(38)
We now construct a kernel ˜P ∈P as
˜P(·|s, a) ∈arg min
p∈Pa
s
ph,
(39)
so that σa
s(h) = ˜Ph(s). Then (25) becomes
g + h(s) = rπ(s) + ( ˜P πh)(s),
(40)
i.e.,
(I −˜P π)h = rπ −ge.
(41)
This is in fact the Bellman equation for the Markov chain (π, ˜P). By standard average-reward MDP theory for irreducible
chains, we must have
g = gπ
˜
P , h = hπ
˜
P + ce,
(42)
for some constant c.
Combining with (38) then implies that
g = gπ
˜
P = gπ
P,
(43)
i.e., ˜P is a worst-case kernel and
h = hπ
˜
P + ce = hπ
Pw + ce
(44)
for some worst-case kernel Pw.
This hence proves uniqueness (up to constants).
Corollary D.2. The robust Bellman optimality equation
V (s) = max
a {r(s, a) −g + σPa
s (V )}
(45)
is uniquely solvable.
Proof. Denote the optimal robust policy by π⋆, and the corresponding worst-case kernel by P⋆. By Theorem 4.6, (gπ⋆
P , hπ⋆
P⋆)
is the solution to the robust Bellman equation of π⋆:
hπ⋆
P⋆(s) = rπ⋆(s) −gπ⋆
P + σπ⋆
s (hπ⋆
P⋆) =
X
a
π⋆(a|s)

r(s, a) −gπ⋆
P + σa
s(hπ⋆
P⋆)

.
(46)
We now set π′(s) = arg maxa{r(s, a) −gπ⋆
P + σa
s(hπ⋆
P⋆)}, ∀s, then we have that
rπ′(s) −hπ′
P′(s) + σπ′
s (hπ′
P′) = gπ′
P ≤gπ⋆
P =
X
a
π⋆(a|s)

r(s, a) −hπ⋆
P⋆(s) + σa
s(hπ⋆
P⋆)

≤rπ′(s) −hπ⋆
P⋆(s) + σπ′
s (hπ⋆
P⋆),
(47)
20

Distributionally Robust Markov Games with Average Reward
which further implies that
hπ⋆
P⋆(s) −hπ′
P′(s) ≤σπ′
s (hπ⋆
P⋆) −σπ′
s (hπ′
P′) ≤P′(hπ⋆
P⋆−hπ′
P′).
(48)
Now we denote x = hπ⋆
P⋆−hπ′
P′, and take Ces`aro summation, it then implies
x ≤µx,
(49)
for the stationary distribution matrix µ > 0 (as it is irreducible, its stationary distribution has positive entries). Similarly, it
implies x(s) = x(s′), and thus hπ⋆
P⋆−hπ′
P′ = ce. This further implies that all inequalities in (47) are equations, thus
hπ⋆
P⋆(s) = max
a
n
r(s, a) −gπ⋆
P + σa
s(hπ⋆
P⋆)
o
,
(50)
hence (hπ⋆
P⋆, gπ⋆
P⋆) is a solution to (7), completing the proof of the first part. The remaining proof follows similarly from
(Wang et al., 2023c).
The uniqueness part similarly follows from the proof of Theorem D.1, by noting that maxx f(x) −maxx g(x) ≤
maxx |f(x) −g(x)|.
Lemma D.3. If for any agent i and any joint policy π−i, BRi(π−i) is nonempty, convex, and BRi(·) is upper semi-continuous,
then BR also satisfies the conditions in Lemma D.4.
Proof. (1). If for any i and π−i, BRi(π−i) is nonempty, then BR(π) = (BR1(π−1), ..., BRN(π−N)) is clearly nonempty.
(2). Consider two policies π1, π2 ∈BR(π). To show the convexity of BR(π), we need to show π′ = απ1 + (1 −α)π2 =
(απ1
1 + (1 −α)π2
1, ..., απ1
N + (1 −α)π2
N) ∈BR(π). Note that for any i, π1
i , π2
i ∈BRi(π−i), and due to the convexity of
BRi(π−i), απ1
i + (1 −α)π2
i ∈BRi(π−i), which completes the proof.
(3). Consider two convergent policy sequences {πn} →π and {µn} →µ, with µn ∈BR(πn), we need to show that
µ ∈BR(π). Note that πn →π implies that πn
i →πi for any i, and similarly µn →µ. Since µn
i ∈BRi(πn
−i), by the
semi-continuity of BRi, we have µi ∈BRi(π−i). Moreover note that
µ ∈BR(π) ⇔µi ∈BRi(π−i), ∀i,
(51)
which hence completes the proof.
D.1. Convexity
Lemma D.4 (Kakutani’s Fixed Point Theorem (Kakutani, 1941)). Let X be a compact convex subset of Rn and let
f : X →2X be a set-valued function for which, (1) f(x) is nonempty and convex, ∀x; (2) f is upper semi-continuous (i.e.,
for any convergent sequences {xn} →x and {yn} →y such that yn ∈f(xn), it holds that y ∈f(x)). Then there exists
some x⋆∈X such that x⋆∈f(x⋆).
Lemma D.5. Consider the robust Bellman optimality equation
g + h(s) = max
a∈A

r(s, a) + σa
s(h)
	
,
s ∈S,
(52)
and let (g, h) be any of its solutions. Let π⋆be an optimal robust policy, i.e. π⋆∈arg maxπ gπ
P. Then (g, h) also solves the
robust Bellman equation associated with π⋆:
g + h(s) =
X
a∈A
π⋆(a | s)
 r(s, a) + σa
s(h)

,
s ∈S.
(53)
Proof. By Theorem D.1, any optimal policy π⋆admits a worst-case kernel P ⋆∈P such that (gπ⋆
P ⋆, hπ⋆
P ⋆) solves the
fixed-policy equation (25) with π = π⋆. Moreover gπ⋆
P ⋆= g⋆
P (the optimal robust average reward), and the robust Bellman
optimality equation (52) also has a solution (g, h) with g = g⋆
P. We must show that h and hπ⋆
P ⋆differ only by a constant.
Equation (52) can be written as
g + h(s) = max
a

r(s, a) + σa
s(h)
	
.
(54)
21

Distributionally Robust Markov Games with Average Reward
Optimality of π⋆implies that at each state s, the support of π⋆(· | s) lies in the set of maximizers of the right-hand side:
π⋆(a | s) > 0 =⇒a ∈arg max
a′ {r(s, a′) + σa′
s (h)}.
Therefore,
g + h(s) =
X
a
π⋆(a | s)

r(s, a) + σa
s(h)
	
,
(55)
i.e., (g, h) is a solution of the fixed-policy robust Bellman equation (53) with π = π⋆.
By Theorem D.1, the solution of the fixed-policy robust Bellman equation for π⋆is unique up to constants and has gain
g = g⋆
P = gπ⋆
P ⋆. Thus h and hπ⋆
P ⋆differ only by an additive constant, and in particular (g, h) is of the form
g = g⋆
P,
h = hπ⋆
P ⋆+ ce.
This hence completes the proof.
Lemma D.6 (Convexity of optimal policies). Define the optimal policy set
Π⋆≜

π
 gπ
P = g⋆
P
	
.
Then Π⋆is convex.
Proof. Let π1, π2 ∈Π⋆and let ˜π ≜απ1 + (1 −α)π2 for some α ∈[0, 1], i.e.
˜π(a | s) = απ1(a | s) + (1 −α)π2(a | s),
s ∈S, a ∈A.
Let (g, h) be any solution of the robust Bellman optimality equation (52). By Lemma D.5, (g, h) also solves the fixed-policy
robust Bellman equations for π1 and π2:
g + h(s) = rπ1(s) + σπ1
s (h),
g + h(s) = rπ2(s) + σπ2
s (h).
Taking the convex combination with weights (α, 1 −α) yields
g + h(s) = α
 rπ1(s) + σπ1
s (h)

+ (1 −α)
 rπ2(s) + σπ2
s (h)

=
X
a
˜π(a | s)r(s, a) +
X
a
˜π(a | s)σa
s(h) = r˜π(s) + σ˜π
s (h).
Thus (g, h) also solves the fixed-policy robust Bellman equation for ˜π. By Theorem D.1, the gain of any such solution must
be the robust average reward of that policy; hence
g˜π
P = g.
Since g = g⋆
P is the maximal robust average reward (because π1, π2 are optimal), we conclude that ˜π is also optimal, i.e.
˜π ∈Π⋆. Therefore Π⋆is convex.
The convexity of the best-response sets in the multi-agent case then follows by applying Lemma D.6 to the induced
single-agent DR-MDPs Mi(π−i), as discussed.
D.2. Semi-Continuity
Lemma D.7. Let {πn} be a sequence of stationary policies converging to π in the product topology. Let P πn and P π
denote the induced kernels for a fixed P ∈P, and let (P πn)⋆and (P π)⋆be their stationary distributions. Then
(P πn)⋆→(P π)⋆
uniformly in P ∈P.
Proof. This is a direct consequence of the continuity properties of irreducible Markov chains; see (Puterman, 2014)
(Prop. 8.4.6). Uniformity in P follows from the compactness of P.
22

Distributionally Robust Markov Games with Average Reward
Lemma D.8. Fix an agent i and let π : S →∆(A−i) be a joint policy of all other agents. Define the operator
T π
P : RS →RS×Ai by
T π
Ph(s, ai) ≜rπ(s, ai) + σπ
s,ai(h),
where
rπ(s, ai) ≜
X
a−i
π(a−i | s) ri
 s, (ai, a−i)

,
and
σπ
s,ai(h) ≜
min
q∈Pπ
s,ai
q⊤h,
Pπ
s,ai ≜



X
a−i
π(a−i | s)P(· | s, (ai, a−i)) : P(· | s, (ai, a−i)) ∈P(ai,a−i)
s


.
Let {πn} be a sequence of opponent policies with πn →π, and {hn} a sequence of functions hn →h uniformly on S. Then
T πn
P (hn) →T π
P(h)
uniformly on S × Ai.
Proof. Recalling the definition of TP we can obtain the difference,
T πn
P (hn) −T π
P (h)

∞= max
s,a
T πn
P (hn)(s, a) −T π
P (h)(s, a)

= max
s,a
rπn(s, a) + σ(Pπn)as (hn) −σ(Pπ)as (h) −rπ(s, a)

≤max
s,a

|rπn(s, a) −rπ(s, a)| + |σ(Pπn)as (hn) −σ(Pπn)as (h)| + |σ(Pπn)as (h) −σ(Pπ)as (h)|
	
≤||πn(s) −π(s)||1 + A + B,
(56)
where A = |σ(Pπn)as (hn) −σ(Pπn)as (h)| and B = |σ(Pπn)as (h) −σ(Pπ)as (h)|. See that by the Lipchitz of σP(·), A ≤
||hn −h||∞. Using the fact that (Pπn)a
s =
 P
b∈A−i πn(b|s)P(·|s, a, b)
	
, looking at B we derive,
B = |σ(Pπn)as (h) −σ(Pπ)as (h)|
= |
min
q∈(Pπn)as
qh −
min
q∈(Pπ)as
qh|
= | min
q∈Pa
s
qπnh −min
q∈Pa
s
qπh|
=
 min
q∈Pa
s
 X
s′∈S
X
b∈A−i
πn(b|s)q(s′|s, a, b)h(s′)

−min
q∈Pa
s
 X
s′∈S
X
b∈A−i
π(b|s)q(s′|s, a, b)h(s′)

≤

X
s′∈S
X
b∈A−i

πn(b|s) −π(b|s)

q(s′|s, a, b)h(s′)
,
for some q ∈Pa
s ,
≤||πn(·|s) −π(·|s)||1 · H,
where H = ||h||∞. We can now combine the terms in (56) to find,
||πn(s) −π(s)||1 + A + B ≤max
s∈S

||πn(s) −π(s)||1 + ||hn −h||∞+ H · ||πn(s) −π(s)||1
	
.
Note that πn(s) →π(s), ∀s ∈S, then ∀ϵ, ∃Ns s.t. ∀n > Ns, ||πn(s)−π(s)||1 ≤ϵ. Similarly with hn(s) →h(s), ∀s ∈S,
then ∀ϵ, ∃Ns s.t. ∀n > Ns, |hn(s) −h(s)| ≤ϵ. Now by setting N = maxs∈S{Ns}, then ∀n > N,
||πn(s) −π(s)||1 ≤ϵ,
and
|hn(s) −h(s)| ≤ϵ,
∀s ∈S.
Therefore, when n > N, ||πn(s) −π(s)||1 + A + B ≤ϵ + ϵ + Hϵ ≲ϵ. This implies that T n
P →TP uniformly on S × A,
which completes the proof.
Theorem D.9 (Semi-continuity). Let πn →π and xn →x, where πn : S →∆(A−i) and xn : S →∆(Ai). If
xn ∈BRi(πn), then x ∈BRi(π).
23

Distributionally Robust Markov Games with Average Reward
Proof. To show that x ∈BRi(π), it suffices to show that x is an optimal policy of the induced AMDP (S, Ai, Pπ, rπ).
Recalling the robust Bellman equation, it is also sufficient to show that g(x,π)
P
satisfies the following:
g(s) = max
a∈Ai{rπ(s, a) + σ(Pπ)as (h) −h(s)} = max
a∈Ai{T π
Pa
s (h)}.
(57)
See that since xn ∈BRi(πn), then xn is the optimal policy of the induced AMDP (S, Ai, Pπn, rπn). Thus, there exists hn,
s.t. (hn, gn = gxn
Pπn) is a solution to,
gxn
Pπn = gn(s) = max
a {rπn(s, a) + σ(Pπn)as (hn) −hn(s)}.
See that gxn
Pπn = minPπn∈Pπn gxn
Pπn ,rπn = minP∈P g(xn,πn)
P,n
, and so gxn
Pπn = gπn,xn
P
. Therefore, for any (xn, πn), there
exists some hn ∈RS such that for all s ∈S,
g(xn,πn)
Ps
(s) = max
a {rπn(s, a) + σ(Pπn)as (hn) −hn(s)}
= max
a {T πn
Pa
s (hn)}.
(58)
Moreover, since hn is some relative function (Wang et al., 2023b), ||hn||∞≤H. Then, there exists some subsequence
{nm}, s.t. hnm →h for some h, and g(xn,πn)
P
→g for some g. Then, we can take the limit as m →∞in (58) to find:
lim
m→∞g(xnm,πnm)
P
= lim
m→∞max
a

T πnm
P
(hnm)
	
(i)
= max
a

lim
m→∞T πnm
P
(hnm)
	
= max
a

T π
P (h)
	
,
(59)
where (i) holds by the uniform convergence in Lemma D.8, and the final equality by πnm →π, and hnm →h. Looking at
the left-hand side of equation (59) we find
lim
m→∞g(xnm,πnm)
P
= lim
m→∞min
P∈P g(xnm,πnm)
P
= lim
m→∞min
P∈P P⋆
(xnm,πnm) · r(xnm,πnm).
By (Puterman, 2014) and (Wang et al., 2023b), we have P⋆
(xnm,πnm) →P⋆
(x,π) uniformly. Thus, lim min = min lim
implies,
lim
m→∞g(xnm,πnm)
P
= min
P∈P lim
m→∞g(xnm,πnm)
P
= min
P∈P g(x,π)
P
= g(x,π)
P
.
Therefore, g(x,π)
P
= maxa

T π
P (h)
	
for some h ∈RS, which completes the proof.
E. Weakly Communicating DR-MGs
Throughout this section we fix a player i ∈N and a stationary joint policy π−i of the other players, and work with the
induced single-agent distributionally robust MDP
Mi(π−i) = (S, Ai, Pπ−i, rπ−i
i
).
All quantities defined below (transition sets, Bellman solutions, etc.) depend on (i, π−i), but we often suppress this
dependence in the notation to lighten the presentation.
The stage reward rπ−i
i
(s, ai) is bounded in [0, 1] by assumption.
The induced ambiguity set Pπ−i inherits
(s, ai)–rectangularity from the original game.
24

Distributionally Robust Markov Games with Average Reward
For a stationary policy πi : S →∆(Ai) of player i and a kernel P ∈Pπ−i, let gπi
P denote the long-run average reward of πi
in Mi(π−i) under P (which exists by standard finite-state average-reward theory). We define the robust worst-case average
reward and the robust best-response set
gπi
Pπ−i ≜
min
P ∈Pπ−i gπi
P ,
(60)
BRi(π−i) ≜
n
πi : gπi
Pπ−i =
sup
µ:S→∆(Ai)
min
P ∈Pπ−i gµ
P
o
.
(61)
Lemma E.1. Let (g∗, h1) and (g∗, h2) be two solutions to the Robust Bellman Optimality Equation in (7). Under the
unichain assumption (Wang et al., 2023b), h1(s) −h2(s) = c for some constant c, for all s ∈S. Namely, the equation has
a unique solution up to some constant.
Proof. Define the difference function ∆(s) = h1(s) −h2(s).
Let π1 be a greedy policy for h1, i.e., π1(s) ∈arg maxa{r(s, a) + σPa
s (h1)}. Let ν1 be the worst-case nature kernel for h1
under π1. It then holds that
g∗+ h1(s) = r(s, π1(s)) +
X
s′
p(s′|s, π1(s), ν1)h1(s′)
(62)
On the other hand, since h2 is also a solution to the optimal equation, it must satisfy the maximization condition. Specifically
for policy π1:
g∗+ h2(s) = max
a {r(s, a) + σPa
s (h2)} ≥r(s, π1(s)) +
min
p∈P(s,π1(s))
X
s′
p(s′|s, π1(s))h2(s′)
(63)
Let ν1,2 be the nature kernel that achieves the minimization for h2 given π1. Then:
g∗+ h2(s) ≥r(s, π1(s)) +
X
s′
p(s′|s, π1(s), ν1,2)h2(s′)
(64)
Returning to (62), since ν1 minimizes h1, replacing it with ν1,2 yields a value ≥the minimum:
g∗+ h1(s) ≤r(s, π1(s)) +
X
s′
p(s′|s, π1(s), ν1,2)h1(s′)
(65)
Subtracting (64) from (65):
h1(s) −h2(s) ≤
X
s′
p(s′|s, π1(s), ν1,2)(h1(s′) −h2(s′))
(66)
Let PA be the transition matrix induced by (π1, ν1,2). We have:
∆≤PA∆
(67)
Thus, ∆is sub-harmonic with respect to PA.
By symmetry, let π2 be optimal for h2, and let ν2,1 minimize h1 under π2. We similarly derive:
∆≥PB∆
(68)
where PB is induced by (π2, ν2,1). Thus, ∆is super-harmonic with respect to PB.
By assumption, both PA and PB define unichain Markov chains. Since ∆≤PA∆, ∆cannot attain a local maximum on the
recurrent class of PA strictly greater than its neighbors. By the Maximum Principle, ∆(s) must be constant on the recurrent
class CA of PA. Let this value be M = maxs ∆(s).
On the other hand, since ∆≥PB∆, ∆cannot attain a local minimum on the recurrent class of PB strictly lower than
its neighbors. By the Minimum Principle, ∆(s) must be constant on the recurrent class CB of PB. Let this value be
m = mins ∆(s).
25

Distributionally Robust Markov Games with Average Reward
Assume M > m. From (67), ∆(s) is non-decreasing in expectation under PA. Trajectories under PA eventually enter CA
(where ∆= M). Thus for any transient state s, ∆(s) ≤M. From (68), ∆(s) is non-increasing in expectation under PB.
Trajectories under PB eventually enter CB (where ∆= m).
The unichain assumption implies the graph is connected. However, if M > m, the gain g∗would necessarily differ or one
policy would exploit the transition to the region of higher bias, contradicting the optimality of the policies for the fixed
scalar g∗. Specifically, if ∆is not constant, the condition ∆≤PA∆and ∆≥PB∆combined with g∗being unique forces:
PA∆= ∆
and
PB∆= ∆
(69)
For a harmonic function on a weakly communicating chain, the values on transient states are convex combinations of values
on the recurrent set. Since the recurrent sets have constant values M (and m respectively), and the global gain constraint
prevents flow from low to high regions without penalty, we must have M = m.
Therefore, ∆(s) = c for all s ∈S, which completes the proof.
E.1. Constant-Gain Robust Bellman Equations
Under Assumption 5.1 (weakly communicating DR-MG), the induced DR-MDP Mi(π−i) is a finite weakly communicating
robust MDP with (s, ai)–rectangular ambiguity. We then therefore invoke the constant-gain robust Bellman theory of (Wang
& Si, 2025).
Lemma E.2 ((Wang & Si, 2025)). There exists a pair (h⋆, α⋆) ∈RS × R with α⋆∈[0, 1] such that the following hold for
every s ∈S:
h⋆(s) =
sup
ϕ∈∆(Ai)
inf
ps∈
 Pπ−i
s
X
ai∈Ai
ϕ(ai)
 rπ−i
i
(s, ai) −α⋆+ p⊤
s,aih⋆
,
(70)
=
inf
ps∈
 Pπ−i
s
sup
ϕ∈∆(Ai)
X
ai∈Ai
ϕ(ai)
 rπ−i
i
(s, ai) −α⋆+ p⊤
s,aih⋆
.
(71)
Moreover, α⋆coincides with the optimal robust average reward:
α⋆=
sup
πi:S→∆(Ai)
min
P ∈Pπ−i gπi
P .
The proof is an application of Wang and Si (2025) to the induced DR-MDP Mi(π−i) and is omitted here.
For each s ∈S we introduce the local saddle Lagrangian
Ls(ϕ, ps) ≜
X
ai∈Ai
ϕ(ai)
 rπ−i
i
(s, ai) −α⋆+ p⊤
s,aih⋆
,
ϕ ∈∆(Ai), ps ∈
 Pπ−i
s.
(72)
We then define the local player and adversary value functions
Fs(ϕ) ≜
inf
ps∈
 Pπ−i
s
Ls(ϕ, ps),
(73)
Ψs(ps) ≜
sup
ϕ∈∆(Ai)
Ls(ϕ, ps).
(74)
We then derive the following results.
Lemma E.3. For each state s ∈S:
1. Fs is concave and upper semicontinuous on the compact convex set ∆(Ai).
2. Ψs is convex and lower semicontinuous on
 Pπ−i
s.
3. With (h⋆, α⋆) from Lemma E.2,
h⋆(s) =
max
ϕ∈∆(Ai) Fs(ϕ) =
min
ps∈
 Pπ−i
s
Ψs(ps).
(75)
26

Distributionally Robust Markov Games with Average Reward
Proof. (1) For fixed ps, the map ϕ 7→Ls(ϕ, ps) is affine (hence continuous and both concave and convex) on the simplex
∆(Ai). The function Fs is the pointwise infimum of this family of continuous affine functions; infima of affine functions are
concave, and infima of continuous functions are upper semicontinuous.
(2) For fixed ϕ, the map ps 7→Ls(ϕ, ps) is affine (and continuous) on the convex set
 Pπ−i
s. The function Ψs is the
pointwise supremum of a family of continuous affine functions; such a supremum is convex and lower semicontinuous.
(3) Comparing (72)–(74) with (70)–(71) we see that
h⋆(s) =
sup
ϕ∈∆(Ai)
inf
ps∈
 Pπ−i
s
Ls(ϕ, ps) =
sup
ϕ∈∆(Ai)
Fs(ϕ),
h⋆(s) =
inf
ps∈
 Pπ−i
s
sup
ϕ∈∆(Ai)
Ls(ϕ, ps) =
inf
ps∈
 Pπ−i
s
Ψs(ps).
Since Fs is upper semicontinuous on the compact set ∆(Ai), its maximum is attained. Likewise Ψs attains its minimum on
the compact set
 Pπ−i
s.
We now define the set of statewise Bellman maximizers
Ms ≜arg
max
ϕ∈∆(Ai) Fs(ϕ),
s ∈S.
(76)
By Lemma E.3, each Ms is nonempty, convex, and compact.
E.2. A Common Supporting Minimizer
Lemma E.4. For each s ∈S there exists
p⋆
s ∈arg
min
ps∈
 Pπ−i
s
Ψs(ps)
such that
h⋆(s) = Ψs(p⋆
s) = Ls(ϕ, p⋆
s) = Fs(ϕ),
∀ϕ ∈Ms.
(77)
Proof. From Lemma E.3(2) and compactness of
 Pπ−i
s, Ψs attains its minimum; pick p⋆
s ∈
 Pπ−i
s such that
Ψs(p⋆
s) = min
ps Ψs(ps) = h⋆(s).
Now let ϕ ∈Ms. Then Fs(ϕ) = h⋆(s) by definition of Ms and (75). We have the chain of inequalities
h⋆(s) = Fs(ϕ) = inf
ps Ls(ϕ, ps) ≤Ls(ϕ, p⋆
s) ≤sup
˜ϕ
Ls(˜ϕ, p⋆
s) = Ψs(p⋆
s) = h⋆(s).
Thus all inequalities are equalities, which yields
Fs(ϕ) = Ls(ϕ, p⋆
s) = Ψs(p⋆
s) = h⋆(s)
for every ϕ ∈Ms.
Because the ambiguity set is (s, ai)–rectangular, the global collection p⋆≜{p⋆
s}s∈S belongs to Pπ−i: we choose
independently, for each state s, a row block p⋆
s from
 Pπ−i
s, and rectangularity ensures that this rowwise product is
feasible.
Under Assumption 5.1, Mi(π−i) is weakly communicating for every kernel P ∈Pπ−i, in particular for P = p⋆. By
the standard structure theorem for weakly communicating MDPs (see, e.g., (Puterman, 2014), Chap. 8), there exists a
decomposition
S = S0 ˙∪Cp⋆,
where:
27

Distributionally Robust Markov Games with Average Reward
• States in S0 are transient under any stationary policy of player i (combined with the fixed opponents π−i and kernel
p⋆).
• The set Cp⋆is the union of the recurrent communicating classes of the Markov chains induced by stationary policies
under p⋆.
We call Cp⋆the communicating region of p⋆.
E.3. Slack Inequalities and Characterization of Gi
For a stationary policy ν : S →∆(Ai) of player i we define the Bellman slack
δν(s) ≜h⋆(s) −Fs
 ν(· | s)

,
s ∈S.
(78)
By (75), h⋆(s) = maxϕ Fs(ϕ), so Fs(ν(· | s)) ≤h⋆(s) and hence δν(s) ≥0.
We recall the definitions (72)–(74) and (75):
Ls(ϕ, ps) =
X
ai∈Ai
ϕ(ai)
 rπ−i
i
(s, ai) −α⋆+ p⊤
s,aih⋆
,
(79)
Fs(ϕ) =
inf
ps∈(Pπ−i)s
Ls(ϕ, ps),
Ψs(ps) =
sup
ϕ∈∆(Ai)
Ls(ϕ, ps),
(80)
h⋆(s) =
max
ϕ∈∆(Ai) Fs(ϕ) =
min
ps∈(Pπ−i)s
Ψs(ps).
(81)
Fix player i and opponent policy π−i and consider the induced DR-MDP Mi(π−i) = (S, Ai, Pπ−i, rπ−i
i
). Let (h⋆, α⋆) be
a constant-gain solution of the optimal robust Bellman equation for Mi(π−i) (as in Lemma E.2).
For each state s ∈S, define the local Lagrangian and values
Ls(ϕ, ps) ≜
X
ai∈Ai
ϕ(ai)

rπ−i
i
(s, ai) −α⋆+ p⊤
s,aih⋆
,
ϕ ∈∆(Ai), ps ∈(Pπ−i)s,
(82)
Fs(ϕ) ≜
inf
ps∈(Pπ−i)s
Ls(ϕ, ps),
Ψs(ps) ≜
sup
ϕ∈∆(Ai)
Ls(ϕ, ps),
(83)
and the statewise maximizer set
Ms ≜arg
max
ϕ∈∆(Ai) Fs(ϕ).
By strong duality (Lemma E.3), for every s,
h⋆(s) = max
ϕ
Fs(ϕ) = min
ps Ψs(ps).
Let p⋆
s ∈arg minps∈(Pπ−i)s Ψs(ps) be a common supporting minimizer as in Lemma E.4, and define the global kernel
p⋆≜{p⋆
s}s∈S ∈Pπ−i.
Lemma E.5. For any stationary policy ν : S →∆(Ai) define the Bellman slack
δν(s) ≜h⋆(s) −Fs(ν(·|s)) ≥0.
(84)
Let (St, At)t≥0 be the trajectory generated by the pair (ν, p⋆). Then for every integer n ≥1,
E
h n−1
X
t=0
 rπ−i
i
(St, At) −α⋆i
≤E[h⋆(S0)] −E[h⋆(Sn)],
(85)
E
h n−1
X
t=0
 rπ−i
i
(St, At) −α⋆i
≥E[h⋆(S0)] −E[h⋆(Sn)] −E
h n−1
X
t=0
δν(St)
i
.
(86)
28

Distributionally Robust Markov Games with Average Reward
Consequently,
lim sup
n→∞E
h 1
n
n−1
X
t=0
 rπ−i
i
(St, At) −α⋆i
≤0,
(87)
lim inf
n→∞E
h 1
n
n−1
X
t=0
 rπ−i
i
(St, At) −α⋆i
≥−lim sup
n→∞E
h 1
n
n−1
X
t=0
δν(St)
i
.
(88)
Moreover, let S = S0 ∪Cp⋆be the weakly-communicating decomposition under p⋆(i.e., S0 is transient under every
stationary policy under p⋆, and Cp⋆is the union of recurrent classes). If ν(·|s) ∈Ms for all s ∈Cp⋆, then the average
reward of ν under p⋆equals α⋆:
gν
p⋆= α⋆.
Proof. We prove the two inequalities (85)–(86) first, then the final claim.
Step 1: Upper bound (85).
Fix a time t ≥0 and condition on St = s. Under (ν, p⋆), we have At ∼ν(·|s) and
St+1 ∼p⋆
s,At, thus
E

rπ−i
i
(St, At) −α⋆+ h⋆(St+1) | St = s

=
X
ai
ν(ai|s)

rπ−i
i
(s, ai) −α⋆+ (p⋆
s,ai)⊤h⋆
= Ls
 ν(·|s), p⋆
s

.
Since p⋆
s minimizes Ψs and Ψs(p⋆
s) = h⋆(s), we have for any ϕ ∈∆(Ai),
Ls(ϕ, p⋆
s) ≤sup
˜ϕ
Ls(˜ϕ, p⋆
s) = Ψs(p⋆
s) = h⋆(s).
Taking ϕ = ν(·|s) yields
E

rπ−i
i
(St, At) −α⋆+ h⋆(St+1) | St = s

≤h⋆(s) = h⋆(St).
Equivalently,
E

rπ−i
i
(St, At) −α⋆| St

≤h⋆(St) −E

h⋆(St+1) | St

.
Taking total expectation and summing from t = 0 to n −1 gives
E
h n−1
X
t=0
 rπ−i
i
(St, At) −α⋆i
≤E
h n−1
X
t=0
 h⋆(St) −h⋆(St+1)
i
= E

h⋆(S0) −h⋆(Sn)

,
where the last equality is the telescoping identity Pn−1
t=0 (h⋆(St) −h⋆(St+1)) = h⋆(S0) −h⋆(Sn). This proves (85).
Step 2: Lower bound (86).
Fix a state s. By definition of Fs as an infimum over ps,
Fs
 ν(·|s)

=
inf
ps∈(Pπ−i)s
Ls
 ν(·|s), ps

≤Ls
 ν(·|s), p⋆
s

.
(89)
Using the slack definition (84), Fs(ν(·|s)) = h⋆(s) −δν(s), so (89) becomes
h⋆(s) −δν(s) ≤Ls
 ν(·|s), p⋆
s

.
(90)
Now condition on St = s and use the same computation as in Step 1: Ls(ν(·|s), p⋆
s) = E[rπ−i
i
(St, At) −α⋆+ h⋆(St+1) |
St = s]. Thus (90) translates to
h⋆(St) −δν(St) ≤E

rπ−i
i
(St, At) −α⋆+ h⋆(St+1) | St

.
29

Distributionally Robust Markov Games with Average Reward
Rearranging gives
E

rπ−i
i
(St, At) −α⋆| St

≥h⋆(St) −E

h⋆(St+1) | St

−δν(St).
Taking total expectation and summing t = 0, . . . , n −1 yields
E
h n−1
X
t=0
 rπ−i
i
(St, At) −α⋆i
≥E
h n−1
X
t=0
 h⋆(St) −h⋆(St+1)
i
−E
h n−1
X
t=0
δν(St)
i
= E[h⋆(S0)] −E[h⋆(Sn)] −E
h n−1
X
t=0
δν(St)
i
,
proving (86).
Step 3: If ν is greedy on Cp⋆then gν
p⋆= α⋆.
Assume ν(·|s) ∈Ms for all s ∈Cp⋆. Then for s ∈Cp⋆we have
Fs(ν(·|s)) = h⋆(s) by definition of Ms, hence δν(s) = 0 for all s ∈Cp⋆.
By weakly communicating structure under p⋆, S0 is transient under every stationary policy, in particular under ν. Therefore,
the total expected number of visits to S0 is finite:
∞
X
t=0
P(St ∈S0) < ∞,
which implies the Ces`aro mean vanishes:
lim
n→∞
1
n
n−1
X
t=0
P(St ∈S0) = 0.
Because rewards are bounded and ∥h⋆∥∞< ∞(Proposition E.7), the slack is uniformly bounded: there exists Bδ < ∞
such that 0 ≤δν(s) ≤Bδ for all s. Hence
0 ≤1
nE
h n−1
X
t=0
δν(St)
i
≤Bδ
n
n−1
X
t=0
P(St ∈S0) −−−−→
n→∞0.
Now divide (85)–(86) by n and let n →∞. Since |h⋆(Sn)| ≤∥h⋆∥∞, the boundary term (E[h⋆(S0)] −E[h⋆(Sn)])/n
vanishes.
The upper bound gives lim supn→∞E[ 1
n
Pn−1
t=0 (r −α⋆)] ≤0, while the lower bound together with
1
nE[Pn−1
t=0 δν(St)] →0 gives lim infn→∞E[ 1
n
Pn−1
t=0 (r −α⋆)] ≥0. Therefore the limit exists and equals 0, i.e.,
lim
n→∞E
h 1
n
n−1
X
t=0
rπ−i
i
(St, At)
i
= α⋆,
which is exactly gν
p⋆= α⋆.
Theorem E.6. Fix π−i and define
Gi(π−i) ≜
n
ν : S →∆(Ai)
 ν(·|s) ∈Ms ∀s ∈S
o
.
(91)
Then Gi(π−i) is nonempty, compact, and convex. Moreover,
Gi(π−i) ⊆BRi(π−i).
Proof. Step 1: Nonemptiness, compactness, convexity. For each s, the set Ms = arg maxϕ∈∆(Ai) Fs(ϕ) is nonempty,
compact, and convex (Lemma E.3 and the fact that Fs is concave and upper semicontinuous on the compact simplex).
Therefore the Cartesian product Q
s∈S Ms is nonempty, compact, and convex in the product topology. By definition,
Gi(π−i) equals this product set.
30

Distributionally Robust Markov Games with Average Reward
Step 2: Robust optimality. Let ν ∈Gi(π−i). Then by definition of Gi(π−i), for every state s, ν(·|s) ∈Ms and hence
Fs
 ν(·|s)

= max
ϕ
Fs(ϕ) = h⋆(s).
(92)
Now fix an arbitrary kernel P ∈Pπ−i and let (St, At) evolve under (ν, P). Conditioning on St = s and using the definition
of Fs as an infimum,
Fs(ν(·|s)) = inf
ps Ls(ν(·|s), ps) ≤Ls(ν(·|s), Ps) = E

rπ−i
i
(St, At) −α⋆+ h⋆(St+1) | St = s

.
Combining with (92) gives the one-step inequality
h⋆(St) ≤E

rπ−i
i
(St, At) −α⋆+ h⋆(St+1) | St

.
Rearrange:
E

rπ−i
i
(St, At) −α⋆| St

≥h⋆(St) −E

h⋆(St+1) | St

.
Taking total expectation and summing t = 0, . . . , n −1 yields
E
h n−1
X
t=0
 rπ−i
i
(St, At) −α⋆i
≥E[h⋆(S0)] −E[h⋆(Sn)].
Divide by n and let n →∞; the boundary term vanishes because ∥h⋆∥∞< ∞. We conclude that
gν
P = lim
n→∞E
h 1
n
n−1
X
t=0
rπ−i
i
(St, At)
i
≥α⋆,
∀P ∈Pπ−i.
Therefore minP ∈Pπ−i gν
P ≥α⋆. But by definition, α⋆= sup˜ν minP g˜ν
P is the optimal min–max value, so also minP gν
P ≤
α⋆. Hence minP gν
P = α⋆, i.e. ν ∈BRi(π−i).
E.4. Semi-Continuity of Gi
We now restore the dependence of all objects on π−i explicitly. For each s ∈S and (u, α) ∈RS × R, define
Lπ−i
s
(ϕ, ps; u, α) ≜
X
ai∈Ai
ϕ(ai)
 rπ−i
i
(s, ai) −α + p⊤
s,aiu

,
(93)
F π−i
s
(ϕ; u, α) ≜
inf
ps∈(Pπ−i)s
Lπ−i
s
(ϕ, ps; u, α).
(94)
For each π−i let (h⋆
π−i, α⋆
π−i) be a constant-gain solution provided by Lemma E.2 for the DR-MDP Mi(π−i), with a fixed
anchoring convention (e.g. h⋆
π−i(s◦) = 0 for some reference state s◦).
We define the statewise greedy sets
Ms(π−i) ≜arg
max
ϕ∈∆(Ai) F π−i
s
 ϕ; h⋆
π−i, α⋆
π−i

,
(95)
Gi(π−i) ≜
n
∆: S →∆(Ai) : ∆(· | s) ∈Ms(π−i) ∀s
o
.
(96)
This reuses the notation Gi(π−i) from (91); the previous section corresponds to a fixed π−i, and here we track how Gi
varies with π−i.
Proposition E.7. There exists a universal constant Cspan < ∞such that for every opponent policy π−i and every
constant-gain solution (h⋆
π−i, α⋆
π−i) of Mi(π−i), sp

h⋆
π−i

≤Cspan.
Proof. First, we consider a fixed policy π−i. By Theorem 4 in (Wang & Si, 2025), it holds that any cluster point of
{V ⋆
π−i,γ(s) −V ⋆
π−i,γ(s0), γ ∈(0, 1)} is a solution to the optimality equation. From Assumption 5.1, the equation only has
one solution, thus this solution must be the unique cluster point of {V ⋆
π−i,γ(s) −V ⋆
π−i,γ(s0), γ ∈(0, 1)}.
31

Distributionally Robust Markov Games with Average Reward
Moreover, under Assumption 5.1, Theorem 6 of (Wang & Si, 2025) shows that there exists some uniform upper bound C:
sup
γ∈(0,1)
sp

V ⋆
π−i,γ

≤C.
(97)
Now note that V ⋆
π−i,γ is continuous in π−i for any γ, thus its maximum CSpan = supγ∈(0,1),π sp

V ⋆
π−i,γ

is achievable
over the compact set Q
j̸=i ∆(Aj), it further holds that
sup
γ∈(0,1),π−i∈Π−i
sp

V ⋆
π−i,γ

≤CSpan.
(98)
Consider
a
fixed
policy
π−i.
Note
that
for
any
ϵ,
there
exists
some
sequence
{γn},
such
that
sp

|V ⋆
π−i,γi(s) −V ⋆
π−i,γi(s0) −h∗(s)

≤ϵ. Thus sp(h∗) ≤ϵ + sp

V ⋆
π−i,γi(s) −V ⋆
π−i,γi

≤ϵ + CSpan.
Thus it holds that for any π−i,
sp

h⋆
π−i

≤CSpan.
(99)
This hence completes the proof.
Lemma E.8. Fix a state s ∈S and an action ai ∈Ai. Let
 πn
−i

n be a sequence of opponent policies converging to π−i
in the product topology, i.e. πn
−i(· | s′) →π−i(· | s′) in ℓ1 for all s′. Then, for each (s, ai), the induced ambiguity slices
converge in Hausdorff distance:
 Pπn
−i
s,ai
H
−−−−→
n→∞
 Pπ−i
s,ai.
Consequently, for each s,
 Pπn
−i
s
H
−−−−→
n→∞
 Pπ−i
s.
Proof. Each induced slice (Pπ−i)s,ai is a Minkowski sum
 Pπ−i
s,ai =
nX
a−i
π−i(a−i | s) q(a−i) : q(a−i) ∈P(ai,a−i)
s
o
,
where the local sets P(ai,a−i)
s
are fixed nonempty compact subsets of ∆(S). The map
(w, q) 7→
X
a−i
w(a−i)q(a−i)
is continuous and bilinear, and the product of the P(ai,a−i)
s
is compact. Standard results on continuous images of compact
sets imply that the set-valued map w 7→M(w) given by this Minkowski sum is continuous in Hausdorff distance. Since
πn
−i(· | s) →π−i(· | s) in ℓ1, we obtain
 Pπn
−i
s,ai = M
 πn
−i(· | s)

H
−→M
 π−i(· | s)

=
 Pπ−i
s,ai.
The convergence of the statewise products
 Pπn
−i
s follows because finite products of Hausdorff-convergent compact sets
converge in Hausdorff distance.
Lemma E.9. Fix a state s ∈S. Let (un, αn, πn
−i)n be a sequence with (un, αn) ∈RS × R and πn
−i →π−i, and suppose
(un, αn) →(u, α). Then
sup
ϕ∈∆(Ai)
F
πn
−i
s
(ϕ; un, αn) −F π−i
s
(ϕ; u, α)
 −−−−→
n→∞
0.
32

Distributionally Robust Markov Games with Average Reward
Proof. Consider the joint map
(ϕ, ps, u, α, π−i) 7→Lπ−i
s
(ϕ, ps; u, α)
from
∆(Ai) ×
[
π−i
(Pπ−i)s × RS × R × Π−i
to R. On any bounded subset of RS × R, this map is continuous. By Theorem E.7 and normalizing u with u(s◦) = 0,
(hence ∥u∥∞≤CSpan, otherwise sp(u) ≥max |ui| −0 ≥CSpan), it suffices to restrict attention to the compact set
Θ ≜
n
(u, α, π−i) : ∥u∥∞≤Cspan, α ∈[0, 1], π−i ∈Π−i
o
.
Lemma E.8 ensures that the feasible sets (Pπ−i)s vary continuously with π−i in Hausdorff distance.
The function F π−i
s
(ϕ; u, α) is the optimal value of the parametric minimization problem
min
ps∈(Pπ−i)s
Lπ−i
s
(ϕ, ps; u, α),
with continuous objective and compact feasible set that depends continuously on the parameter (ϕ, u, α, π−i). Berge’s
Maximum Theorem (Berge, 1877) implies that the value map
(ϕ, u, α, π−i) 7→F π−i
s
(ϕ; u, α)
is continuous on the compact domain ∆(Ai) × Θ, and hence uniformly continuous. Therefore, whenever (un, αn, πn
−i) →
(u, α, π−i),
sup
ϕ∈∆(Ai)
F
πn
−i
s
(ϕ; un, αn) −F π−i
s
(ϕ; u, α)
 −→0.
Lemma E.10 ((Ross, 2013)). Let (fn)n be a sequence of continuous real-valued functions on the simplex ∆(Ai) converging
uniformly to f. For each n, let
Mn = arg
max
ϕ∈∆(Ai) fn(ϕ),
M = arg
max
ϕ∈∆(Ai) f(ϕ),
which are nonempty, compact, convex sets. If ϕn ∈Mn and ϕn →ϕ, then ϕ ∈M.
Proof. This is standard. Because fn →f uniformly and each fn attains its maximum on the compact set ∆(Ai), the limit
point ϕ must satisfy f(ϕ) ≥f(ψ) for all ψ, hence ϕ ∈M.
Lemma E.11. Let πn
−i →π−i be a sequence of opponent policies. For each n, let (un, αn) be a constant-gain solution for
the DR-MDP Mi(πn
−i), normalized by un(s◦) = 0. Then there exists a subsequence (still denoted (un, αn)) and a limit pair
(u, α) such that
(un, αn) →(u, α),
and (u, α) is a constant-gain solution for Mi(π−i).
Proof. By Theorem E.7, ∥un∥∞≤Cspan for all n, and 0 ≤αn ≤1 by bounded rewards. Thus (un, αn) lies in a compact
subset of RS × [0, 1]. By Bolzano–Weierstrass theorem (Ross, 2013), there exists a subsequence such that
(un, αn) →(u, α)
for some (u, α).
For each n and each s, the constant-gain equation can be written as
un(s) =
sup
ϕ∈∆(Ai)
F
πn
−i
s
(ϕ; un, αn).
By Lemma E.9, for fixed s the functions ϕ 7→F
πn
−i
s
(ϕ; un, αn) converge uniformly to ϕ 7→F π−i
s
(ϕ; u, α). Since
un(s) →u(s) and supϕ Fn(ϕ) converges to supϕ F(ϕ) under uniform convergence, we obtain
u(s) =
sup
ϕ∈∆(Ai)
F π−i
s
(ϕ; u, α),
∀s ∈S.
That is, (u, α) is a constant-gain solution for Mi(π−i).
33

Distributionally Robust Markov Games with Average Reward
Lemma E.12 (Convergence of maximizers under uniform convergence). Let K be a compact metric space and let
fn, f : K →R be real-valued functions. Assume fn →f uniformly on K. Let xn ∈arg maxx∈K fn(x) and suppose
(along a subsequence) xn →x ∈K. Then x ∈arg maxx∈K f(x).
Proof. Fix any y ∈K. Since xn maximizes fn on K, we have
fn(xn) ≥fn(y)
∀n.
Add and subtract f(xn) and f(y):
f(xn) = fn(xn) +
 f(xn) −fn(xn)

≥fn(y) +
 f(xn) −fn(xn)

.
Similarly, fn(y) = f(y) +
 fn(y) −f(y)

, hence
f(xn) ≥f(y) +
 fn(y) −f(y)

+
 f(xn) −fn(xn)

.
Now take lim infn→∞on both sides. Uniform convergence implies
sup
x∈K
|fn(x) −f(x)| →0
=⇒
fn(y) −f(y) →0,
f(xn) −fn(xn) →0.
Also xn →x and continuity of f (or simply: in compact finite-dimensional sets, the Fs in the paper are upper semicontinuous
and this argument can be stated with upper limits; for the present application f is continuous) gives f(xn) →f(x). Therefore
f(x) ≥f(y).
Since y ∈K was arbitrary, x is a maximizer of f on K, i.e. x ∈arg maxK f.
We can now establish upper semi-continuity of the greedy response map.
Theorem E.13 (Upper hemicontinuity of Gi). Fix player i and consider the correspondence π−i 7→Gi(π−i) defined in
(88). Then for every π−i, Gi is upper hemicontinuous.
Proof. Let πn
−i →π−i and let ∆n ∈Gi(πn
−i) such that ∆n →∆(componentwise, equivalently in the product topology on
stationary policies). We show ∆∈Gi(π−i).
For each n, by definition of Gi(πn
−i) there exists a (normalized) constant-gain solution (un, αn) of the induced robust MDP
Mi(πn
−i) used to form F
πn
−i
s
(·; un, αn), and such that for every state s,
∆n(· | s) ∈arg
max
ϕ∈∆(Ai) F
πn
−i
s
(ϕ; un, αn).
(100)
By Lemma E.11 (compactness and subsequence convergence of normalized constant-gain solutions), there is a subsequence
(still indexed by n for simplicity) such that
(un, αn) →(u, α),
where (u, α) is a constant-gain solution of Mi(π−i).
Fix an arbitrary state s ∈S and define functions on the compact simplex ∆(Ai):
fn(ϕ) := F
πn
−i
s
(ϕ; un, αn),
f(ϕ) := F π−i
s
(ϕ; u, α).
By Lemma E.9, fn →f uniformly on ∆(Ai).
From (100), we have ϕn := ∆n(· | s) ∈arg maxϕ fn(ϕ). Moreover ϕn →ϕ := ∆(· | s) by assumption. Applying
Lemma E.12 yields
∆(· | s) ∈arg
max
ϕ∈∆(Ai) f(ϕ) = arg
max
ϕ∈∆(Ai) F π−i
s
(ϕ; u, α).
Since s was arbitrary, this holds for all s ∈S, hence ∆∈Gi(π−i). Therefore the graph of Gi is closed, and (together with
compact values shown above) Gi is upper hemicontinuous.
34

Distributionally Robust Markov Games with Average Reward
E.5. Existence of a Robust Nash Equilibrium
We finally combine the previous results across all players. Let
Π ≜
Y
k∈N
Y
s∈S
∆(Ak)
be the compact convex set of stationary joint policies. For each player i, we have a set-valued map
Gi :
Y
j̸=i
Y
s∈S
∆(Aj) ⇒
Y
s∈S
∆(Ai)
with nonempty compact convex values and upper semi-continuous graph.
Define the product map
G : Π ⇒Π,
G(π) ≜
Y
i∈N
Gi(π−i),
where π−i denotes the opponent profile for player i. Standard results (e.g., Kakutani’s fixed-point theorem) imply that G has
a fixed point: there exists π⋆∈Π such that π⋆∈G(π⋆).
By construction, for every i we have
π⋆
i ∈Gi(π⋆
−i) ⊆BRi(π⋆
−i),
where the inclusion is Theorem E.6. Thus π⋆is a stationary robust Nash equilibrium of the DR-MG.
F. Lipschitz Smoothness
In this section, we study the Lipschitz smoothness of the solutions to robust Bellman equations.
We first recall the seminorm and contraction property from (Xu et al., 2025b).
Lemma F.1 (Lemma 3.2 in (Xu et al., 2025b)). Under Assumption 4.1, there exists a seminorm ∥·∥P on R|S| and a constant
γ ∈(0, 1) such that:
1. ∥x + c1∥P = ∥x∥P for all x ∈R|S| and c ∈R (constants are annihilated).
2. For every stationary policy profile π and every scalar g, the operator T π,g
k
is a γ-contraction on the quotient space
R|S|/span{1} equipped with ∥· ∥P, i.e.
T π,g
k
v −T π,g
k
w

P ≤γ∥v −w∥P
for all v, w with v(s◦) = w(s◦).
Since all norms on a finite-dimensional space are equivalent, there exist finite constants C∞←P, CP←∞, Csp←P > 0 such
that for all zero-mean x,
∥x∥∞≤C∞←P∥x∥P,
∥x∥P ≤CP←∞∥x∥∞,
sp(x) ≤Csp←P∥x∥P.
(101)
Lemma F.2. Let Rmax
≜
maxk,s,a |rk(s, a)|.
There exists a finite constant BV
>
0, depending only on
(Rmax, γ, C∞←P, CP←∞) and the construction of ∥· ∥P, such that for every player k and every joint policy π,
∥V π
k ∥∞≤BV ,
where V π
k is the uniquely anchored bias function satisfying V π
k (s◦) = 0 and the fixed-policy robust Bellman equation with
gain gπ
k .
Proof. Fix a player k and policy profile π, and let (gπ
k , V π
k ) be a gain/bias solution of the robust Bellman equation, anchored
by V π
k (s◦) = 0. We may write
V π
k = T π,gπ
k
k
(V π
k ).
35

Distributionally Robust Markov Games with Average Reward
Subtracting T π,gπ
k
k
(0) and using Lemma F.1 gives
V π
k −T π,gπ
k
k
(0)

P =
T π,gπ
k
k
(V π
k ) −T π,gπ
k
k
(0)

P ≤γ∥V π
k ∥P.
Hence
(1 −γ)∥V π
k ∥P ≤
T π,gπ
k
k
(0)

P.
By definition,
T π,gπ
k
k
(0)(s) =
X
a
π(a | s)
 rk(s, a) −gπ
k + σa
s(0)

= rπ
k(s) −gπ
k ,
because σa
s(0) = 0. Thus
T π,gπ
k
k
(0)

∞= ∥rπ
k −gπ
k 1∥∞≤|gπ
k | + max
s
|rπ
k(s)| ≤2Rmax,
using |gπ
k | ≤Rmax (see Lemma F.3 below) and |rπ
k(s)| ≤Rmax. By norm equivalence (101),
T π,gπ
k
k
(0)

P ≤CP←∞
T π,gπ
k
k
(0)

∞≤2CP←∞Rmax.
Combining,
∥V π
k ∥P ≤2CP←∞
1 −γ Rmax,
and then
∥V π
k ∥∞≤C∞←P∥V π
k ∥P ≤2C∞←PCP←∞
1 −γ
Rmax ≜BV .
Lemma F.3. For every player k and joint policy π, the robust average reward gπ
k satisfies
|gπ
k | ≤Rmax.
Proof. By definition of the average reward under any kernel P,
gπ,P
k
= lim
T →∞
1
T
T −1
X
t=0
E[rk(St, At)],
and |rk(s, a)| ≤Rmax for all (s, a). Thus for any P, |gπ,P
k
| ≤Rmax, and taking the worst-case kernel can only decrease
the value in absolute value, so |gπ
k | = | minP gπ,P
k
| ≤Rmax.
We next control the sensitivity of the Bellman operator with respect to the policy.
Lemma F.4. Fix a state s and let π, ˜π be two joint policies. Then their joint action distributions at s satisfy
X
a∈A(s)

K
Y
j=1
˜πj(aj | s) −
K
Y
j=1
πj(aj | s)
 ≤
K
X
j=1
˜πj(· | s) −πj(· | s)

1.
Proof. Use the telescoping identity for products:
K
Y
j=1
xj −
K
Y
j=1
yj =
K
X
m=1
(xm −ym)
 Y
j<m
yj
 Y
j>m
xj

,
and apply the triangle inequality. Summing over a and using that for any fixed m the remaining factors are nonnegative and
sum to at most 1 when marginalizing over a yields the claim.
36

Distributionally Robust Markov Games with Average Reward
Lemma F.5. Fix a player k and let BV be as in Lemma F.2. For any v ∈R|S| with ∥v∥∞≤BV and any scalar g
with |g| ≤Rmax, define the robust one-step return Fk(s, a; v) = rk(s, a) + σa
s(v) and the operator T π,g
k
as above. Then
there exists a constant CΠ > 0, depending only on (K, |S|, Amax, Rmax, BV ) with Amax ≜maxk,s |Ak|, such that for all
policies π, ˜π,
T ˜π,g
k
(v) −T π,g
k
(v)

∞≤CΠ∥˜π −π∥2.
Proof. For each state s,
T ˜π,g
k
(v)(s) −T π,g
k
(v)(s)

=

X
a
 ˜π(a | s) −π(a | s)
 rk(s, a) −g + σa
s(v)
.
Because |rk(s, a)| ≤Rmax, |g| ≤Rmax and |σa
s(v)| ≤∥v∥∞≤BV , we have |rk(s, a) −g + σa
s(v)| ≤2Rmax + BV .
Thus
T ˜π,g
k
(v)(s) −T π,g
k
(v)(s)
 ≤(2Rmax + BV )
X
a
˜π(a | s) −π(a | s)
.
By Lemma F.4 the last sum is bounded by PK
j=1 ∥˜πj(· | s) −πj(· | s)∥1. Summing over s and applying Cauchy–Schwarz,
we get
∥T ˜π,g
k
(v) −T π,g
k
(v)∥∞≤CΠ∥˜π −π∥2
with CΠ absorbing the dimension-dependent constants.
We can now state and prove the Lipschitz continuity of the evaluation map.
Theorem F.6. Under Assumption 4.1 and Lemmas F.1–F.5, for each player k there exist finite constants LV , Lg > 0
(independent of π) such that for any two joint policies π, ˜π,
∥V ˜π
k −V π
k ∥∞≤LV ∥˜π −π∥2,
|g˜π
k −gπ
k | ≤Lg∥˜π −π∥2.
Proof. Fix k and policies π, ˜π. Let (gπ
k , V π
k ) and (g˜π
k , V ˜π
k ) be the gain/bias pairs solving the respective robust Bellman
equations, anchored by V π
k (s◦) = V ˜π
k (s◦) = 0. Write ∆v ≜V ˜π
k −V π
k and ∆g ≜g˜π
k −gπ
k .
Step 1: Lipschitz continuity of the bias. Using the fixed-point relations V π
k = T π,gπ
k
k
(V π
k ) and V ˜π
k = T ˜π,g˜π
k
k
(V ˜π
k ), we have
∆v = T ˜π,g˜π
k
k
(V ˜π
k ) −T π,gπ
k
k
(V π
k )
=

T ˜π,g˜π
k
k
(V ˜π
k ) −T π,g˜π
k
k
(V ˜π
k )

+

T π,g˜π
k
k
(V ˜π
k ) −T π,g˜π
k
k
(V π
k )

+

T π,g˜π
k
k
(V π
k ) −T π,gπ
k
k
(V π
k )

.
We bound each term in ∥· ∥P.
The second term is controlled by Lemma F.1:
T π,g˜π
k
k
(V ˜π
k ) −T π,g˜π
k
k
(V π
k )

P ≤γ∥∆v∥P.
For the first term we apply Lemma F.5 with v = V ˜π
k and g = g˜π
k . By Lemmas F.2 and F.3, ∥V ˜π
k ∥∞≤BV and |g˜π
k | ≤Rmax,
so the conditions of Lemma F.5 hold and
T ˜π,g˜π
k
k
(V ˜π
k ) −T π,g˜π
k
k
(V ˜π
k )

∞≤CΠ∥˜π −π∥2.
Using (101),
T ˜π,g˜π
k
k
(V ˜π
k ) −T π,g˜π
k
k
(V ˜π
k )

P ≤CP←∞CΠ∥˜π −π∥2.
The third term is the effect of changing g at fixed π and v:
T π,g˜π
k
k
(V π
k )(s) −T π,gπ
k
k
(V π
k )(s) =
X
a
π(a | s)

−g˜π
k + gπ
k

= (gπ
k −g˜π
k ),
37

Distributionally Robust Markov Games with Average Reward
so
T π,g˜π
k
k
(V π
k ) −T π,gπ
k
k
(V π
k ) = −∆g 1.
By construction ∥1∥P = 0 (Lemma F.1), so this term vanishes in ∥· ∥P.
Combining these three bounds we get
∥∆v∥P ≤CP←∞CΠ∥˜π −π∥2 + γ∥∆v∥P,
hence
(1 −γ)∥∆v∥P ≤CP←∞CΠ∥˜π −π∥2.
Therefore
∥∆v∥P ≤CP←∞CΠ
1 −γ
∥˜π −π∥2.
Using ∥· ∥∞≤C∞←P∥· ∥P we obtain
∥V ˜π
k −V π
k ∥∞≤LV ∥˜π −π∥2,
with
LV ≜C∞←PCP←∞CΠ
1 −γ
.
Step 2: Lipschitz continuity of the gain. Using the Bellman equation at the anchor state s◦, we can write
gπ
k =
X
a
π(a | s◦)

rk(s◦, a) + σa
s◦(V π
k )

−V π
k (s◦)
=
X
a
π(a | s◦)Fk(s◦, a; V π
k ),
because V π
k (s◦) = 0 by anchoring. Similarly,
g˜π
k =
X
a
˜π(a | s◦)Fk(s◦, a; V ˜π
k ).
Hence
|g˜π
k −gπ
k | ≤

X
a
 ˜π(a | s◦) −π(a | s◦)

Fk(s◦, a; V ˜π
k )

+

X
a
π(a | s◦)
 Fk(s◦, a; V ˜π
k ) −Fk(s◦, a; V π
k )

≜T1 + T2.
For T1, using |Fk(s◦, a; v)| ≤Rmax + ∥v∥∞≤Rmax + BV and Lemma F.4 at s◦,
T1 ≤(Rmax + BV )
X
a
˜π(a | s◦) −π(a | s◦)
 ≤C1∥˜π −π∥2,
for some constant C1 depending only on the game dimensions.
For T2, note that for any v, w,
Fk(s◦, a; v) −Fk(s◦, a; w)
 =
σa
s◦(v) −σa
s◦(w)
 ≤∥v −w∥∞,
because each q ∈U(s◦, a) is a probability vector and | minq q⊤v −minq q⊤w| ≤maxq |q⊤(v −w)| ≤∥v −w∥∞. Thus
T2 ≤∥V ˜π
k −V π
k ∥∞≤LV ∥˜π −π∥2.
Altogether,
|g˜π
k −gπ
k | ≤(C1 + LV )∥˜π −π∥2 ≜Lg∥˜π −π∥2.
This completes the proof.
38

Distributionally Robust Markov Games with Average Reward
Algorithm 2 Robust Nash-Iteration
Initialization: hi = 0, ∀i ∈N
while TRUE do
for all i ∈N do
h0
i ←hi
for all s, a ∈S × A do
Qi(s, a, h0
i ) ←ri(s, a) + σPa
s (h0
i )
π(s) ←NE(Qi(s, a, h0
i ))
hi(s) ←Eπ(s)[Qi(s, a, h0
i )]
end for
end for
if maxi{sp(hi −h0
i )} = 0 then
BREAK
end if
end while
Output: π
G. Nash Iteration
Throughout this section, we adopt the following notational conventions for the robust Bellman operators.
For each state-joint–action pair (s, a) the transition row is uncertain in a nonempty, convex, compact set U(s, a) ⊂∆(S).
For any v ∈R|S| define the local support function
σa
s(v) ≜
min
q∈U(s,a) q⊤v,
and for a joint policy π define
σπ
s (v) ≜min
p∈Pπ
s
p⊤v,
Pπ
s
≜
nX
a
π(a | s)q(· | s, a) : q(· | s, a) ∈U(s, a)
o
.
Thus σπ
s (v) = P
a π(a | s)σa
s(v), and by compactness the minima defining σa
s and σπ
s are always attained.
For each player k, the robust one-step return is
Fk(s, a; v) ≜rk(s, a) + σa
s(v),
and for a fixed policy profile π and scalar g the (player–k) robust evaluation operator is
(T π,g
k
v)(s) ≜
X
a
π(a | s)

rk(s, a) −g + σa
s(v)

.
With this notation, the fixed-policy robust average-reward Bellman equation for player k under π reads
V π
k (s) = (T π,gπ
k
k
V π
k )(s),
s ∈S,
where (gπ
k , V π
k ) is a gain/bias pair as in Theorem Theorem 4.6 (uniqueness up to constants).
We always anchor biases by choosing a reference state s◦∈S and imposing V π
k (s◦) = 0.
Assumption G.1. For each state s and each vector of bias estimates h = (h1, . . . , hN), consider the one-stage game with
payoff functions
Qk(s, a; hk) ≜rk(s, a) + σa
s(hk),
a ∈A(s), k ∈N.
At every state s, the algorithm selects either
1. a Nash equilibrium of this stage game that is globally optimal for all players in the sense that every player attains his
maximal robust one-step return at the selected equilibrium, or
39

Distributionally Robust Markov Games with Average Reward
2. a saddle point of the stage game, i.e. a pure/mixed action profile (π1(· | s), . . . , πN(· | s)) such that no player can
unilaterally deviate to improve her robust one-step return.
The first part of our assumption is necessary for convergence under average reward Markov games (Li, 2003; Hu & Wellman,
2003; Littman, 2001; Bowling & Veloso, 2001; Bowling, 2000). The second assumption is a technical assumption to ensure
convergence, and can be removed by modifying the update rule by a multi-step operator, see (Wang et al., 2023c; Xu et al.,
2025b).
Theorem G.2 (Convergence of robust Nash iteration). Suppose Assumption 4.1 and Assumption G.1 hold. Then the robust
Nash-iteration algorithm (Algorithm 2) converges, from any initialization h0, to an average-reward robust Nash equilibrium
of the DR-MG.
Proof. We split the proof into two parts.
(i) Any limit point (if convergent) of Nash iteration is a robust NE.
Consider one iteration of Algorithm 2. For each
player i, let h0
i be the current bias estimate, define
Qi(s, a; h0
i ) ≜ri(s, a) + σa
s(h0
i ),
and let π(· | s) be a Nash equilibrium of the one-stage game with payoffs {Qi(s, ·; h0
i )}i∈N , chosen according to
Assumption G.1. The algorithm then sets
hi(s) ≜Ea∼π(·|s)[Qi(s, a; h0
i )],
s ∈S.
The stopping condition is
max
i∈N sp(hi −h0
i ) = 0,
where sp(x) = maxs x(s) −mins x(s) is the span seminorm. The condition sp(hi −h0
i ) = 0 is equivalent to
hi −h0
i = ci1
for some scalar ci ∈R, where 1 is the all-ones vector.
Assume the algorithm terminates at a pair (π, h) satisfying the stopping condition. Then for each player i and state s,
hi(s) = Eπ(·|s)[ri(s, a) + σa
s(h0
i )]
= Eπ(·|s)[ri(s, a) + σa
s(hi −ci1)].
Using the translation-invariance of the support function, for any v and scalar c,
σa
s(v −c1) =
min
q∈U(s,a) q⊤(v −c1) = min
q
 q⊤v −c

= σa
s(v) −c,
we conclude that
hi(s) = Eπ(·|s)[ri(s, a) + σa
s(hi) −ci] = Eπ(·|s)[ri(s, a) + σa
s(hi)] −ci.
Rearranging,
hi(s) + ci =
X
a
π(a | s)
 ri(s, a) + σa
s(hi)

,
s ∈S.
(102)
Define gi ≜ci and set Vi ≜hi. Then (102) can be written as
Vi(s) =
X
a
π(a | s)
 ri(s, a) −gi + σa
s(Vi)

,
s ∈S.
(103)
Thus (gi, Vi) solves the fixed-policy robust Bellman equation (6) for player i under the joint policy π. By Theorem 4.6,
for each i there exists a worst-case kernel P ∈P such that gi = gπ
P,i and Vi coincides with the robust bias hπ
P,i up to an
additive constant; in particular, we may choose the anchor so that Vi = hπ
P,i and
hπ
P,i(s) + gπ
P,i =
X
a
π(a | s)
 ri(s, a) + σa
s(hπ
P,i)

,
s ∈S.
(104)
40

Distributionally Robust Markov Games with Average Reward
Now suppose, for contradiction, that π is not a robust average-reward Nash equilibrium. Then there exist a player i and an
alternative stationary policy µi such that
g(π−i,µi)
P,i
> g(π−i,πi)
P,i
= gπ
P,i.
(105)
By Theorem 4.6 applied to the induced DR-MDP Mi(π−i) with policy µi, there exists a robust bias hµ
i such that
hµ
i (s) + g(π−i,µi)
P,i
=
X
a
(π−i, µi)(a | s)
 ri(s, a) + σa
s(hµ
i )

,
s ∈S.
(106)
Combining (104) and (106), we have
r(π−i,µi)
i
+ σ(π−i,µi)(hµ
i ) −hµ
i
= g(π−i,µi)
P,i
> gπ
P,i = rπ
i + σπ(hπ
P,i) −hπ
P,i,
(107)
where the inequality uses (105), and the equalities are vector versions of (104)–(106).
On the other hand, at each state s, the algorithm selects a Nash equilibrium π(· | s) of the one-stage game with payoffs
Qi(s, a; hπ
P,i) = ri(s, a) + σa
s(hπ
P,i). The NE property implies that for any alternative mixed action µi(· | s),
Ea∼(π−i,µi)Qi(s, a; hπ
P,i) ≤Ea∼π(·|s)Qi(s, a; hπ
P,i).
Equivalently,
r(π−i,µi)
i
+ σ(π−i,µi)(hπ
P,i) ≤rπ
i + σπ(hπ
P,i).
(108)
Subtracting hπ
P,i from both sides of (108) and combining with (107), we obtain
rπ
i + σπ(hπ
P,i) −hπ
P,i
< r(π−i,µi)
i
+ σ(π−i,µi)(hµ
i ) −hµ
i
≤σ(π−i,µi)(hµ
i ) −hµ
i + rπ
i + σπ(hπ
P,i) −σ(π−i,µi)(hπ
P,i).
(109)
Rearranging (109) yields
hµ
i −hπ
P,i < σ(π−i,µi)(hµ
i ) −σ(π−i,µi)(hπ
P,i).
(110)
Now apply Lemma G.4 to the convex function v 7→σ(π−i,µi)(v) with V1 = hµ
i and V2 = hπ
P,i. Lemma G.4 ensures the
existence of a kernel P ∈P(π−i,µi) such that
σ(π−i,µi)(hµ
i ) −σ(π−i,µi)(hπ
P,i) = P(hµ
i −hπ
P,i).
Substituting this into (110) gives
hµ
i −hπ
P,i < P(hµ
i −hπ
P,i)
componentwise.
(111)
Let x ≜hµ
i −hπ
P,i. Then (111) reads x < Px componentwise.
By Assumption 4.1, every kernel in P (and thus P) is irreducible. For an irreducible stochastic matrix P, any vector
x, with x ≤Px componentwise, must be constant, i.e. x = c1 for some scalar c. A standard proof goes as follows:
let m = mins x(s) and choose s0 with x(s0) = m. From x(s0) ≤P
s′ P(s′|s0)x(s′) and x(s′) ≥m, we deduce that
x(s′) = m whenever P(s′|s0) > 0. By irreducibility, every state is reachable from s0 under some power P n, and the same
argument applied iteratively shows x(s) = m for all s. Applying the same reasoning to −x if needed yields the claim for
x ≥Px. Thus
hµ
i −hπ
P,i = ci1
(112)
for some scalar ci.
Plugging (112) into the Bellman equations (104)–(106) and using the translation-invariance of the support function again,
we see that the corresponding gains must coincide:
g(π−i,µi)
P,i
= gπ
P,i,
which contradicts (105). Therefore no such profitable deviation µi exists, and π is a robust average-reward Nash equilibrium.
41

Distributionally Robust Markov Games with Average Reward
(ii) Contraction of the Nash operator and convergence.
Let h = (h1, . . . , hN) ∈RN|S| and define
Ti(h)(s) ≜Eπ(·|s)

ri(s, a) + σa
s(hi)

,
T(h) ≜(T1(h), . . . , TN(h)),
where at each state s the policy π(· | s) is a Nash equilibrium of the one-stage game with payoffs Qi(s, a; hi), selected
according to Assumption G.1.
We show that T is a contraction in the product span seminorm ∥h∥sp ≜maxi sp(hi), where sp(x) = maxs x(s)−mins x(s).
Fix h, h′ and a player i and state s.
Case 1 (global optimality). If the NE selection at s is globally optimal in the sense of Assumption G.1, then
Ti(h)(s) −Ti(h′)(s) = max
π(·|s) Eπ(·|s)

ri(s, a) + σa
s(hi)

−max
π′(·|s) Eπ′(·|s)

ri(s, a) + σa
s(h′
i)

≤Eπ(·|s)

σa
s(hi) −σa
s(h′
i)

≤max
a
 σa
s(hi) −σa
s(h′
i)

.
(113)
Case 2 (saddle point). If the NE is a saddle point, Assumption G.1 ensures that for any joint policy π′ differing only in
player i’s component,
Ti(h)(s) −Ti(h′)(s) = Eπ(·|s)

ri(s, a) + σa
s(hi)

−Eπ′(·|s)

ri(s, a) + σa
s(h′
i)

≤E(π′
−i,πi)(·|s)

ri(s, a) + σa
s(hi)

−E(π′
−i,πi)(·|s)

ri(s, a) + σa
s(h′
i)

≤max
a
 σa
s(hi) −σa
s(h′
i)

.
(114)
By symmetry (swapping h and h′), we also obtain the lower bound
Ti(h)(s) −Ti(h′)(s) ≥min
a
 σa
s(hi) −σa
s(h′
i)

.
(115)
Combining (113)–(115) we have, for each (i, s),
min
a
 σa
s(hi) −σa
s(h′
i)

≤Ti(h)(s) −Ti(h′)(s) ≤max
a
 σa
s(hi) −σa
s(h′
i)

.
Taking maxima and minima over s and using Lemma G.4 below (which shows that the map v 7→σa
s(v) has the same
Dobrushin coefficient as a stochastic matrix in the span seminorm), we obtain
sp
 Ti(h) −Ti(h′)

≤τ sp(hi −h′
i),
for some τ < 1 depending only on the uncertainty set and the irreducibility constant (Lemma G.3). Taking the maximum
over i yields
∥T(h) −T(h′)∥sp ≤τ∥h −h′∥sp.
Thus T is a contraction in the product span seminorm.
By the Banach fixed-point theorem, T has a unique fixed point h∗(modulo constants); iterating Algorithm 2 (without
stopping) converges to h∗from any initialization h0. The associated per-state Nash selection π∗(· | s) at h∗is exactly the
policy considered in part (i), hence is a robust average-reward Nash equilibrium, and the claimed convergence follows.
G.1. Technical Lemmas
Lemma G.3. For a stochastic matrix P define the ergodicity coefficient
τ(P) ≜1
2 max
s,s′∈S
X
s′′∈S
P(s′′ | s) −P(s′′ | s′)
.
42

Distributionally Robust Markov Games with Average Reward
Then for all x, y ∈R|S|,
sp(Px −Py) ≤τ(P) sp(x −y).
If P is irreducible, there exists ¯τ < 1 (depending only on P) such that τ(P) ≤¯τ.
Proof. This is the standard Dobrushin contraction in the span seminorm; see e.g. Sec. 16.3 of (Puterman, 2014) or (Filar &
Vrieze, 1996). For completeness, one can write Px −Py = P(x −y) and note that taking x −y supported on two states
attaining the maximum and minimum values attains the worst-case contraction factor, which is precisely τ(P) as defined
above. Irreducibility implies τ(P) < 1.
Lemma G.4 (Support-function difference as a kernel action). Assume each uncertainty set Pa
s is nonempty, compact, and
convex.
(a) State-action level. For any v1, v2 ∈R|S| and any fixed pair (s, a), there exists a vector p⋆
s,a ∈Pa
s such that
σa
s(v1) −σa
s(v2) = (p⋆
s,a)⊤(v1 −v2).
(b) Statewise operator and global kernel. Fix a policy π, and define σπ as above. Then for any v1, v2 ∈R|S| there exists a
stochastic kernel P ⋆∈P (constructed row by row) such that
σπ(v1) −σπ(v2) = P ⋆(v1 −v2).
In particular, when we view σa(·) or σπ(·) as statewise support operators, their difference can always be written as the
action of a suitable transition kernel on v1 −v2.
Proof. We begin with part (a) for a fixed (s, a).
Since Pa
s is compact and p 7→p⊤v is continuous, the minima defining σa
s(v1) and σa
s(v2) are attained. Choose
p1
s,a ∈arg min
p∈Pa
s
p⊤v1,
p2
s,a ∈arg min
p∈Pa
s
p⊤v2.
Denote
σ1 ≜σa
s(v1) = (p1
s,a)⊤v1,
σ2 ≜σa
s(v2) = (p2
s,a)⊤v2,
δ ≜v1 −v2.
From the optimality of p1
s,a and p2
s,a we have
(p1
s,a)⊤v1 ≤(p2
s,a)⊤v1,
(p2
s,a)⊤v2 ≤(p1
s,a)⊤v2.
Rewriting,
(p1
s,a)⊤δ = (p1
s,a)⊤v1 −(p1
s,a)⊤v2 ≤σ1 −σ2,
(p2
s,a)⊤δ = (p2
s,a)⊤v1 −(p2
s,a)⊤v2 ≥σ1 −σ2.
Thus
(p1
s,a)⊤δ ≤σa
s(v1) −σa
s(v2) ≤(p2
s,a)⊤δ.
Because Pa
s is convex, the entire line segment
pλ
s,a ≜λp1
s,a + (1 −λ)p2
s,a,
λ ∈[0, 1],
lies in Pa
s . Define
h(λ) ≜(pλ
s,a)⊤δ = λ(p1
s,a)⊤δ + (1 −λ)(p2
s,a)⊤δ.
The map λ 7→h(λ) is continuous and linear in λ, and its image on [0, 1] is exactly the interval

(p1
s,a)⊤δ, (p2
s,a)⊤δ

.
43

Distributionally Robust Markov Games with Average Reward
Since σa
s(v1) −σa
s(v2) lies between these two endpoints, there exists λ⋆∈[0, 1] such that
h(λ⋆) = σa
s(v1) −σa
s(v2).
Setting p⋆
s,a ≜pλ⋆
s,a ∈Pa
s yields
σa
s(v1) −σa
s(v2) = (p⋆
s,a)⊤δ,
which proves part (a).
Fix a policy π and a state s. The aggregated set Pπ
s is, by definition, the image of the product Q
a Pa
s under the continuous
affine map
(pa
s)a 7−→
X
a
π(a | s) pa
s,
so Pπ
s is also nonempty, compact, and convex. Repeating the argument of Steps 1–3 with Pπ
s in place of Pa
s , we obtain for
each s a vector p⋆
s ∈Pπ
s such that
σπ
s (v1) −σπ
s (v2) = (p⋆
s)⊤(v1 −v2).
Now define a (row-stochastic) kernel P ⋆on S by setting its s-th row to be P ⋆(· | s) ≜p⋆
s. By construction P ⋆(· | s) ∈Pπ
s
for every s, so P ⋆is an admissible kernel under π. Stacking the statewise equalities yields
σπ(v1) −σπ(v2) = P ⋆(v1 −v2),
as claimed.
H. Robust TD-Descent Analysis
In this section, we develop our studies on our robust TD based algorithm. Throughout, we assume the DR-MG satisfies
Assumption 4.1 (irreducibility), so that all induced DR-MDPs are irreducible and admit unique average rewards, and the
corresponding robust Bellman equation is solvable.
H.1. Computational Complexity
We first discuss the computational complexity of Algorithm 1. Recall in the algorithm, the following steps are executed:
• For each agent k, solve the robust Bellman equation in (6) for the induced DR-MDP to get (gn
k , V n
k )
• For all (k, s, ak), compute robust TD errors ΩR,n
k
(s, ak) and gradient components Φn
k(s, ak)
• Form the TD direction Dn and project to get πn+1
Robust Bellman step. Solving a single-agent robust Bellman equation can be done in TRB(S, Ak) time which is polynomial
in S, Ak (Xu et al., 2025b). Hence the total complexity is O(NTRB(S, Amax)).
TD error step. For each (k, s, ak), the computation cost is O

A
Ak Cσ

, where Cσ is the computational cost for solving
the support function. Notably, for commonly uncertainty sets defined through divergence functions, Cσ is also polynomial
(Iyengar, 2005). Thus the total complexity is O (SNACσ).
Gradient computation step. Notably, ∆R is a finite sum of terms of the form α Q
i πi(ai|s), thus computing its Moreau
envelop and gradient is itself a polynomial in the πi. Computing them at most involves sums over joint actions similar to the
TD-error computation, so an upper bound is O (SNA).
Update step. From the definition of Dn, its computation cost O(S´sMiAi); And the following projection step to the product
of simplexes has a complexity of O (Ak log Ak) for each (k, s). Thus the total complexity is O (S P
k Ak log Ak).
Hence, the total computational complexity for each step is
O

NTRB(S, Amax, δ) + SNACσ

,
(116)
which is polynomial in the size of the DR-MG parameters.
44

Distributionally Robust Markov Games with Average Reward
H.2. Robust TD Errors, Global TD Gap, and Feasible Set
For a joint policy π ∈Π and player k ∈N, the induced DR-MDP Mk(π−k) is
Mk(π−k) =
 S, Ak, Pπ−k, rπ−k
k

,
where
rπ−k
k
(s, ak) ≜
X
a−k∈A−k
π−k(a−k | s) rk(s, ak, a−k),
(117)
Pπ−k
s,ak ≜
n
X
a−k∈A−k
π−k(a−k | s) p(· | s, ak, a−k) : p(· | s, ak, a−k) ∈P(ak,a−k)
s
o
.
(118)
For Vk ∈RS and a convex ambiguity slice U ⊆∆(S) we denote the robust support function σU(Vk) ≜minp∈U p⊤Vk.
We then define our robust TD notions.
Definition H.1 (Robust TD error). Fix a joint policy π and a player k ∈N. For s ∈S and ak ∈Ak, and given
(gk, Vk) ∈R × RS, define:
QR
k (s, ak; π−k | Vk) ≜
X
a−k∈A−k
π−k(a−k | s)

rk(s, ak, a−k) + σP
(ak,a−k)
s
(Vk)

,
(119)
ΩR
k (s, ak; π−k | gk, Vk) ≜gk + Vk(s) −QR
k (s, ak; π−k | Vk).
(120)
Definition H.2. For (π, g, V ) ∈Π × RN × (RS)N define the global robust TD gap
∆R(π, g, V ) ≜
X
k∈N
X
s∈S
X
ak∈Ak
πk(ak | s) ΩR
k (s, ak; π−k | gk, Vk),
(121)
and the feasible set
F ≜
n
(π, g, V ) : π ∈Π, ΩR
k (s, ak; π−k | gk, Vk) ≥0, ∀k, s, ak
o
.
(122)
We first show that robust Nash equilibria can be characterized by a complementarity condition on the robust TD errors.
Proposition H.3 (Robust TD complementarity). Suppose Assumption 4.1 holds. A stationary joint policy π = (πk)k∈N is a
stationary robust Nash equilibrium if and only if there exist scalars gk ∈R and vectors Vk ∈R|S|, k ∈N, such that for
every k ∈N, s ∈S and ak ∈Ak,
ΩR
k (s, ak; π−k | gk, Vk) ≥0,
(123a)
X
ak∈Ak
πk(ak | s) ΩR
k (s, ak; π−k | gk, Vk) = 0,
(123b)
X
ak∈Ak
πk(ak | s) = 1,
πk(ak | s) ≥0.
(123c)
Proof. (⇒) Assume π is a stationary robust Nash equilibrium. Fix a player k and the opponents’ policy π−k, and consider
the induced DR-MDP Mk(π−k). By Assumption 4.1 this induced DR-MDP also satisfies irreducibility.
Let (gk, Vk) be a gain/bias pair for an optimal robust policy in Mk(π−k).3 By optimality, (gk, Vk) satisfies the optimal
robust Bellman equation
Vk(s) = max
ak∈Ak
n
rπ−k
k
(s, ak) −gk + σP
π−k
s,ak (Vk)
o
,
s ∈S,
(124)
where rπ−k
k
and Pπ−k
s,ak as above. By the definition of QR
k , (124) is equivalent to
gk + Vk(s) = max
ak∈Ak QR
k (s, ak; π−k | Vk),
s ∈S.
(125)
3Such a pair exists by the robust average-reward Bellman results in Theorem 4.6 of the main text.
45

Distributionally Robust Markov Games with Average Reward
Using the TD error definition (H.1), we can rewrite (125) as
ΩR
k (s, ak; π−k | gk, Vk) = gk + Vk(s) −QR
k (s, ak; π−k | Vk) ≥0
for all ak ∈Ak,
with equality for those ak that achieve the maximum in (125). Thus (123a) holds, and moreover,
gk + Vk(s) = max
ak QR
k (s, ak; π−k | Vk) = QR
k (s, ak; π−k | Vk)
whenever πk(ak | s) > 0.
Equivalently, ΩR
k (s, ak; π−k | gk, Vk) = 0 whenever πk(ak | s) > 0, so
X
ak
πk(ak | s)ΩR
k (s, ak; π−k | gk, Vk) = 0.
This is exactly (123b). The simplex constraints (123c) hold by definition of a stationary policy.
(⇐) Now suppose π and (gk, Vk) satisfy (123). Fix k and π−k, and consider again the induced DR-MDP Mk(π−k).
For any s ∈S and ak ∈Ak, the inequality (123a) can be rewritten as
gk + Vk(s) ≥QR
k (s, ak; π−k | Vk),
so gk + Vk(s) is an upper bound on the robust one-step return over all actions ak at state s. Combining this with (123b), we
obtain
0 =
X
ak
πk(ak | s) ΩR
k (s, ak; π−k | gk, Vk)
=
X
ak
πk(ak | s)
 gk + Vk(s) −QR
k (s, ak; π−k | Vk)

= gk + Vk(s) −
X
ak
πk(ak | s) QR
k (s, ak; π−k | Vk).
Hence
gk + Vk(s) =
X
ak
πk(ak | s) QR
k (s, ak; π−k | Vk).
Since each term QR
k (s, ak; ·) is upper bounded by gk + Vk(s), their convex combination equals gk + Vk(s) only if
QR
k (s, ak; π−k | Vk) = gk + Vk(s)
whenever πk(ak | s) > 0.
That is, πk(· | s) puts positive mass only on actions that maximize QR
k (s, ·; π−k | Vk), and thus gk + Vk satisfies the optimal
robust Bellman equation (125).
By the average-reward theory for DR-MDPs (Theorem 4.6 in the main text), this implies that πk is an optimal robust policy
in Mk(π−k), i.e. a robust best response to π−k. Since the argument holds for every k ∈N, the joint policy π is a stationary
robust Nash equilibrium.
The complementarity conditions (123) naturally lead to a global TD gap functional.
Lemma H.4. For any (π, g, V ) ∈F we have ∆R(π, g, V ) ≥0. Moreover, ∆R(π, g, V ) = 0 if and only if the complemen-
tarity conditions (123) hold.
Proof. If (π, g, V ) ∈F then ΩR
k (s, ak; π−k | gk, Vk) ≥0 and πk(ak | s) ≥0 for all k, s, ak. Hence every summand in
(11) is nonnegative and ∆R(π, g, V ) ≥0.
Conversely, if ∆R(π, g, V ) = 0, then every term in the finite sum (11) must be zero:
πk(ak | s)ΩR
k (s, ak; π−k | gk, Vk) = 0,
∀k, s, ak.
Summing over ak yields
X
ak
πk(ak | s) ΩR
k (s, ak; π−k | gk, Vk) = 0,
∀k, s,
which is exactly (123b). The inequalities (123a) and simplex constraints (123c) already hold by the definition of F. The
converse direction is immediate from Definition H.2.
46

Distributionally Robust Markov Games with Average Reward
Combining Lemma H.4 with Proposition H.3 yields:
Corollary H.5. Under Assumption 4.1:
1. For any (π, g, V ) ∈F, ∆R(π, g, V ) ≥0.
2. A policy profile π is a stationary robust Nash equilibrium if and only if there exist (g, V ) such that (π, g, V ) ∈F and
∆R(π, g, V ) = 0.
Thus, on the feasible set F, robust NE are precisely the (global) minimizers of ∆R, and finding a robust NE is equivalent to
find the feasible solution of ∆R = 0
H.3. Smoothed DR-MGs and NE
In this section, we introduce the smoothed DR-MG as a proxy of the vanilla DR-MG.
For v ∈RS and some uncertainty set P, denote the robust support (worst-case expectation) functional
σP(v) := min
p∈P⟨p, v⟩.
This map is concave and Lipschitz but may be nonsmooth.
We introduce a standard Moreau-type smoothing through the convex support function. Define the (convex) support function
hP(u) := max
p∈P ⟨p, u⟩.
Then σP(v) = −hP(−v). For λ > 0, define the Moreau envelope of hP:
(hP)λ(u) := min
w∈RS

hP(w) + 1
2λ∥w −u∥2
2

.
We define the smoothed robust expectation:
σλ
P(v) := −(hP)λ(−v).
Lemma H.6. Let Z ⊂Rd be convex.
(i) (Product rule) Let f, g : Z →R be differentiable and assume:
∥∇f(x) −∇f(y)∥≤Lf∥x −y∥,
∥∇g(x) −∇g(y)∥≤Lg∥x −y∥,
∀x, y ∈Z.
Assume also supZ |f| ≤Bf, supZ |g| ≤Bg, supZ ∥∇f∥≤B∇f, supZ ∥∇g∥≤B∇g. Then h := fg satisfies
∥∇h(x) −∇h(y)∥≤

BfLg + BgLf + B∇fB∇g

∥x −y∥,
∀x, y ∈Z.
(ii) (Scalar composition) Let φ : R →R be C1 with Lipschitz derivative:
|φ′(u) −φ′(v)| ≤Lφ|u −v|,
∀u, v ∈R.
Let g : Z →R be differentiable with ∥∇g(x) −∇g(y)∥≤Lg∥x −y∥and supZ ∥∇g∥≤B∇g.
Let Bφ′ :=
supt∈g(Z) |φ′(t)| < ∞. Then h := φ ◦g satisfies
∥∇h(x) −∇h(y)∥≤

Bφ′Lg + LφB2
∇g

∥x −y∥,
∀x, y ∈Z.
Proof. (i) ∇(fg) = f∇g + g∇f, so for any x, y ∈Z,
∥∇(fg)(x) −∇(fg)(y)∥= ∥f(x)∇g(x) −f(y)∇g(y) + g(x)∇f(x) −g(y)∇f(y)∥
≤∥f(x)(∇g(x) −∇g(y))∥+ ∥(f(x) −f(y))∇g(y)∥
+ ∥g(x)(∇f(x) −∇f(y))∥+ ∥(g(x) −g(y))∇f(y)∥.
47

Distributionally Robust Markov Games with Average Reward
Bound the first and third terms by BfLg∥x −y∥and BgLf∥x −y∥. For the second term, use the mean-value bound
|f(x) −f(y)| ≤B∇f∥x −y∥(since f is differentiable and supZ ∥∇f∥< ∞on the compact sets used in the paper), giving
≤B∇fB∇g∥x −y∥. Similarly the fourth term is ≤B∇gB∇f∥x −y∥(same bound). Combining yields the stated constant.
(ii) ∇(φ ◦g)(x) = φ′(g(x)) ∇g(x), hence
∥∇(φ ◦g)(x) −∇(φ ◦g)(y)∥= ∥φ′(g(x))∇g(x) −φ′(g(y))∇g(y)∥
≤|φ′(g(x))| · ∥∇g(x) −∇g(y)∥+ |φ′(g(x)) −φ′(g(y))| · ∥∇g(y)∥.
Bound the first term by Bφ′Lg∥x−y∥. For the second term, use Lipschitzness of φ′ and the fact |g(x)−g(y)| ≤B∇g∥x−y∥
to obtain
|φ′(g(x)) −φ′(g(y))| ≤Lφ|g(x) −g(y)| ≤LφB∇g∥x −y∥,
so the second term is ≤LφB2
∇g∥x −y∥.
Lemma H.7 (Smoothness and Lipschitz gradient of Mλ). Fix λ > 0 and ρ > 0. On the compact set Z = Π × G × V, the
merit function Mλ defined in (117) is continuously differentiable and has Lipschitz gradient: there exists Lλ < ∞such that
for all z, z′ ∈Z,
∥∇Mλ(z) −∇Mλ(z′)∥≤Lλ∥z −z′∥.
Proof. Write z = (π, g, V ) ∈Z.
Step 0: Uniform bounds on Z. Because Z is compact, define finite constants
Bg := max
g∈G ∥g∥∞,
BV := max
V ∈V ∥V ∥∞,
Rmax := max
k,s,a |rk(s, a)|.
Also π ∈Π implies each coordinate πk(ak | s) ∈[0, 1].
For any ambiguity slice P ⊂∆(S) and any v ∈R|S|,
|σP,λ(v)| ≤max
p∈∆(S) |p⊤v| ≤∥v∥∞.
Thus on Z, |σP,λ(Vk)| ≤BV .
Step 1: ΩRS
k,λ is C1,1 on Z. Fix (k, s, ak). Recall (116):
ΩRS
k,λ(s, ak; π−k | gk, Vk) = gk + Vk(s) −QRS
k,λ(s, ak; π−k | Vk),
where
QRS
k,λ(s, ak; π−k | Vk) =
X
a−k
π−k(a−k | s)

rk(s, ak, a−k) + σP
(ak,a−k)
s
,λ(Vk)

.
By Lemma H.6, for each fixed (s, ak, a−k) the map Vk 7→σP
(ak,a−k)
s
,λ(Vk) is C1 and has Lipschitz gradient with constant
at most 1/λ. The dependence of QRS
k,λ on π−k is multilinear (polynomial) in the coordinates of π and hence has globally
bounded second derivatives on the compact product simplex Π; therefore π 7→QRS
k,λ has a Lipschitz gradient on Π (with
some finite constant depending only on (N, |S|, |A|) and bounds above). Combining:
• (gk, Vk(s)) 7→gk + Vk(s) is affine (hence C1,1 with zero Lipschitz-gradient constant);
• π 7→π−k(a−k | s) is smooth with Lipschitz gradient on Π;
• Vk 7→σP,λ(Vk) is C1,1 with constant ≤1/λ by Lemma H.6;
and using Lemma H.6(i) (product rule) and finite summation over a−k, we conclude: there exists a finite constant LΩ,λ such
that for all z, z′ ∈Z,
∥∇ΩRS
k,λ(z) −∇ΩRS
k,λ(z′)∥≤LΩ,λ ∥z −z′∥.
(126)
In particular, ΩRS
k,λ is C1 and ∇ΩRS
k,λ is bounded on Z; denote B∇Ω:= supz∈Z ∥∇ΩRS
k,λ(z)∥< ∞.
48

Distributionally Robust Markov Games with Average Reward
Also, by the bounds in Step 0,
|ΩRS
k,λ(z)| ≤|gk| + |Vk(s)| +
X
a−k
π−k(a−k | s)
 |rk| + |σλ|

≤Bg + BV + (Rmax + BV ),
so |ΩRS
k,λ(z)| ≤BΩfor some finite BΩindependent of z ∈Z.
Step 2: Squared complementarity terms have Lipschitz gradients. Define the scalar map
hk,s,ak(z) := πk(ak | s) ΩRS
k,λ(s, ak; π−k | gk, Vk).
The coordinate map z 7→πk(ak | s) is linear in z (hence C1,1 with zero Lipschitz-gradient constant), and z 7→ΩRS
k,λ is C1,1
by (126). By Lemma H.6(i), there exists Lh < ∞such that ∇hk,s,ak is Lipschitz on Z:
∥∇hk,s,ak(z) −∇hk,s,ak(z′)∥≤Lh∥z −z′∥,
∀z, z′ ∈Z.
Moreover supZ |hk,s,ak| ≤BΩ(since πk(· | s) ∈[0, 1]) and supZ ∥∇hk,s,ak∥< ∞by continuity on compactness.
Now consider φ1(x) := 1
2x2. Then φ1 is C1 and φ′
1(x) = x is 1-Lipschitz. Applying Lemma H.6(ii) with g = hk,s,ak
yields that
mk,s,ak(z) := 1
2hk,s,ak(z)2
has Lipschitz gradient on Z with some finite constant Lm < ∞.
Step 3: Negative-part penalty terms have Lipschitz gradients. Define φ2(x) := ρ
2[x]2
−. This scalar function is C1
everywhere with derivative
φ′
2(x) = ρ x 1{x < 0},
and φ′
2 is globally ρ-Lipschitz on R (piecewise linear with slope ρ on (−∞, 0) and 0 on (0, ∞)). Apply Lemma H.6(ii)
with g(z) = ΩRS
k,λ(z). Using (126) and boundedness of ∇ΩRS
k,λ on Z, we obtain that
pk,s,ak(z) := ρ
2

ΩRS
k,λ(z)
2
−
has Lipschitz gradient on Z with some finite constant Lp < ∞.
Step 4: Sum over finitely many indices. Finally, Mλ in (117) is a finite sum of the mk,s,ak and pk,s,ak terms. A finite sum
of functions with Lipschitz gradients has Lipschitz gradient, with constant given by the sum of constants. Thus there exists
Lλ < ∞such that
∥∇Mλ(z) −∇Mλ(z′)∥≤Lλ∥z −z′∥,
∀z, z′ ∈Z.
This also implies Mλ is continuously differentiable on Z.
We further use the smoothed operator to define smoothed robust TD errors.
Fix a player k and an opponents policy π−k. For v ∈RS define the smoothed robust Q-value as
QRS
k,λ(s, ak; π−k | v) :=
X
a−k∈A−k
π−k(a−k | s)

rk(s, ak, a−k) + σλ
P
(ak,a−k)
s
(v)

.
Given (gk, Vk) ∈R × RS define the (smoothed) robust TD error as
ΩRS
k,λ(s, ak; π−k | gk, Vk) := gk + Vk(s) −QRS
k,λ(s, ak; π−k | Vk).
(127)
H.4. Complementarity Merit
We then extend the TD-error characterization to the smoothed ones.
For scalar x, define the negative part [x]−= max{0, −x}. Define the merit function
Lλ(π, g, V ) := 1
2
X
k∈N
X
s∈S
X
ak∈Ak

πk(ak|s) ΩRS
k,λ(s, ak; π−k | gk, Vk)
2
+ ρ
2
X
k,s,ak
  
ΩRS
k,λ(s, ak; π−k | gk, Vk)

−
2,
(128)
where ρ > 0 is a fixed penalty parameter.
We then have the following result.
49

Distributionally Robust Markov Games with Average Reward
Lemma H.8 (Merit zeros imply feasibility and complementarity). If Lλ(π, g, V ) = 0, then for every (k, s, ak):
ΩRS
k,λ(s, ak; π−k | gk, Vk) ≥0,
πk(ak|s) ΩRS
k,λ(s, ak; π−k | gk, Vk) = 0.
Consequently, for each player k and each state s, if
ΩRS
k,λ(s, ak; π−k | gk, Vk) ≥0,
πk(ak|s) ΩRS
k,λ(s, ak; π−k | gk, Vk) = 0,
then
gk + Vk(s) = max
ak∈Ak QRS
k,λ(s, ak; π−k | Vk).
Proof. If Lλ = 0, both nonnegative summands in (128) must be zero. The second term being zero implies
h
ΩRS
k,λ(·)
i
−= 0
for all (k, s, ak), hence ΩRS
k,λ ≥0 for all (k, s, ak).
The first term being zero implies πk(ak|s)ΩRS
k,λ(s, ak; π−k | gk, Vk) = 0 for every (k, s, ak). This hence proves the first
part.
For the second part, fix k and s. Since πk(·|s) is a probability distribution, there exists at least one action ¯ak ∈Ak with
πk(¯ak|s) > 0. For that ¯ak, complementarity forces ΩRS
k,λ(s, ¯ak; π−k | gk, Vk) = 0. Thus,
gk + Vk(s) = QRS
k,λ(s, ¯ak; π−k | Vk).
But for any ak we have ΩRS
k,λ(s, ak; ·) ≥0, i.e., gk + Vk(s) ≥QRS
k,λ(s, ak; π−k | Vk). Therefore gk + Vk(s) equals the
maximum over ak.
Corollary H.9 (Connection to (smoothed) robust NE). Any (π, g, V ) with Lλ(π, g, V ) = 0 defines a joint policy π such
that each πk(·|s) is supported on maximizers of QRS
k,λ(s, ·; π−k | Vk). In particular, π is a stationary Nash equilibrium of
the λ-smoothed robust game.
Proof. From Lemma H.8, for fixed (k, s), ΩRS
k,λ(s, ak) ≥0 for all ak and equals 0 on the support of πk(·|s). But
ΩRS
k,λ(s, ak) = gk + Vk(s) −QRS
k,λ(s, ak; π−k | Vk), so ΩRS
k,λ(s, ak) = 0 iff ak attains the maximum of QRS
k,λ(s, ·; π−k | Vk).
Thus, πk(·|s) assigns positive probability only to best-response actions at each state s, which is precisely the stationary NE
condition for the smoothed robust game.
Remark H.10. Note that when λ →0, σλ
P(v) →σP(v), thus ΩRS
k,λ →ΩR
k . Hence, when Lλ = 0 for λ small enough,
the smoothed robust NE will result in a small value ∆R, thus is close to a robust NE. Namely, the smoothed NE is an
approximation of robust NE.
H.5. Robust TD Algorithm
We now give an actor-critic recursion that performs projected gradient steps on Lλ(π, g, V ), with a fast critic step size αn
and a slow actor step size ηn.
Let G ⊂RN be a nonempty compact convex set for gains g (e.g., a box [−Gmax, Gmax]N). Let V ⊂RNS be a nonempty
compact convex set for V , with the anchoring constraints built in (e.g., Vk(s◦) = 0 for all k for a fixed reference state s◦).
Define the joint constraint set
Z := Π × G × V.
Let ΓΠ and ΓG×V denote Euclidean projections. We then design our algorithm as follows.
H.6. Convergence Analysis
We now give a complete convergence analysis for Algorithm 1. The structure is standard for projected gradient methods on
smooth objectives, with care taken for two step sizes.
50

Distributionally Robust Markov Games with Average Reward
Algorithm 3 Two-time-scale Robust Actor–Critic on the Merit Lλ
1: Input: step sizes {ηn}, {αn}, smoothing λ > 0, penalty ρ > 0
2: Initialize π0 ∈Π, (g0, V 0) ∈G × V
3: for n = 0, 1, 2, . . . do
4:
Critic step (fast):
(gn+ 1
2 , V n+ 1
2 ) = ΓG×V

(gn, V n) −αn∇(g,V )Lλ(πn, gn, V n)

.
5:
Actor step (slow):
πn+1 = ΓΠ

πn −ηn∇πLλ(πn, gn+ 1
2 , V n+ 1
2 )

.
6:
Set (gn+1, V n+1) = (gn+ 1
2 , V n+ 1
2 ).
7: end for
Assumption H.11 (Two-time-scale Robbins–Monro). The step sizes satisfy:
ηn > 0,
αn > 0,
∞
X
n=0
ηn = ∞,
∞
X
n=0
η2
n < ∞,
∞
X
n=0
αn = ∞,
∞
X
n=0
α2
n < ∞,
ηn
αn
→0.
Lemma H.12 (Smoothness and Lipschitz gradient). Fix λ > 0 and ρ > 0. On the compact set Z, the merit Lλ is
continuously differentiable, and its gradient is Lipschitz: there exists Lλ < ∞such that for all z, z′ ∈Z,
∥∇Lλ(z) −∇Lλ(z′)∥≤Lλ∥z −z′∥.
Proof. We argue term by term.
(i) Smoothness of ΩRS
k,λ. For fixed (k, s, ak), ΩRS
k,λ is given by (127). It is affine in (gk, Vk(s)) and depends on Vk through
σλ
P
(ak,a−k)
s
(Vk), which is C1 by Lemma H.7. It depends on π−k linearly. Hence ΩRS
k,λ is C1 in (π, g, V ).
(ii) Smoothness of the squared complementarity term. The map (π, g, V ) 7→πk(ak|s) ΩRS
k,λ(·) is C1 as a product of C1
maps.
(iii) Smoothness of the negative-part penalty. The scalar function x 7→[x]2
−is C1 everywhere: it equals 0 for x ≥0,
equals x2 for x < 0, and has derivative 0 at x = 0. Composing a C1 map ΩRS
k,λ with a C1 scalar function preserves C1.
Thus Lλ is C1.
(iv) Lipschitz gradient on a compact set. A C1 function has locally Lipschitz gradient if its Hessian is bounded locally.
Here we only need global Lipschitz on the compact Z. Since all constituent maps are C1 and Z is compact, ∇Lλ is
continuous on Z and hence uniformly Lipschitz on Z. Formally, one can bound second derivatives using Lemma H.7 (which
gives Lip(∇σλ) ≤1/λ), boundedness of π (simplex), and boundedness of (g, V ) (projection set).
We recall the standard projected gradient mapping.
Definition H.13 (Projected gradient mapping). Let f be differentiable and C a nonempty closed convex set. For γ > 0
define
GC,γ(x) := 1
γ

x −ΓC(x −γ∇f(x))

.
Lemma H.14 (One-step descent for projected gradient). Let f be differentiable on C with L-Lipschitz gradient. Fix
γ ∈(0, 2/L) and let y = ΓC(x −γ∇f(x)). Then
f(y) ≤f(x) −γ

1 −Lγ
2

∥GC,γ(x)∥2.
Proof. Let y = ΓC(x −γ∇f(x)) and define d := x −y so that d = γGC,γ(x).
Step 1: Projection inequality. The projection optimality condition gives, for all z ∈C,
⟨x −γ∇f(x) −y, z −y⟩≤0.
51

Distributionally Robust Markov Games with Average Reward
Take z = x ∈C, yielding
⟨x −γ∇f(x) −y, x −y⟩≤0
⇒
⟨d −γ∇f(x), d⟩≤0.
Hence
∥d∥2 ≤γ⟨∇f(x), d⟩.
Equivalently,
⟨∇f(x), y −x⟩= −⟨∇f(x), d⟩≤−1
γ ∥d∥2.
Step 2: Smoothness upper bound. Because ∇f is L-Lipschitz, the standard descent lemma gives
f(y) ≤f(x) + ⟨∇f(x), y −x⟩+ L
2 ∥y −x∥2 = f(x) + ⟨∇f(x), y −x⟩+ L
2 ∥d∥2.
Using the bound from Step 1:
f(y) ≤f(x) −1
γ ∥d∥2 + L
2 ∥d∥2 = f(x) −
 1
γ −L
2

∥d∥2.
Since d = γGC,γ(x),
 1
γ −L
2

∥d∥2 =
 1
γ −L
2

γ2∥GC,γ(x)∥2 = γ

1 −Lγ
2

∥GC,γ(x)∥2.
This proves the claim.
Theorem H.15 (Convergence to first-order stationary points). Assume Assumption H.11. Let {(πn, gn, V n)} be generated
by Algorithm 1. Then:
1. The merit values Lλ(πn, gn, V n) converge to a finite limit.
2. The projected gradient mappings vanish asymptotically:
lim
n→∞∥GΠ,ηn(πn)∥= 0,
lim
n→∞∥GG×V,αn(gn, V n)∥= 0,
where each G is defined w.r.t. the corresponding block objective (Lλ with the other block held fixed at the point used in
Algorithm 1).
3. Every accumulation point (π⋆, g⋆, V ⋆) of the iterates is a (block) stationary point of Lλ on Z, i.e. it satisfies the
first-order KKT condition
0 ∈∇Lλ(π⋆, g⋆, V ⋆) + NZ(π⋆, g⋆, V ⋆),
where NZ is the normal cone of Z.
Proof. Let zn := (πn, gn, V n) ∈Z.
Step 0: Global smoothness constant and small-step regime. By Lemma H.12, there exists Lλ such that ∇Lλ is
Lλ-Lipschitz on Z. Because ηn →0 and αn →0 (from square summability), there exists n0 such that for all n ≥n0,
ηn < 2
Lλ
,
αn < 2
Lλ
.
Step 1: Critic-step descent. Define the critic update map (with π frozen at πn):
yn+ 1
2 := (gn+ 1
2 , V n+ 1
2 ) = ΓG×V

yn −αn∇yLλ(πn, yn)

,
where yn = (gn, V n).
52

Distributionally Robust Markov Games with Average Reward
Apply Lemma H.14 with f(y) = Lλ(πn, y), C = G × V, and γ = αn. For all n ≥n0 we get
Lλ(πn, yn+ 1
2 ) ≤Lλ(πn, yn) −αn

1 −Lλαn
2
 GG×V,αn(yn)
2.
(129)
Step 2: Actor-step descent. Now define the actor update with critic frozen at yn+ 1
2 :
πn+1 = ΓΠ

πn −ηn∇πLλ(πn, yn+ 1
2 )

.
Apply Lemma H.14 with f(π) = Lλ(π, yn+ 1
2 ), C = Π, γ = ηn. For all n ≥n0:
Lλ(πn+1, yn+ 1
2 ) ≤Lλ(πn, yn+ 1
2 ) −ηn

1 −Lληn
2
 GΠ,ηn(πn)
2.
(130)
Finally set yn+1 = yn+ 1
2 .
Step 3: Combine and telescope. Combine (129) and (130): for all n ≥n0,
Lλ(zn+1) = Lλ(πn+1, yn+ 1
2 )
≤Lλ(πn, yn) −αn

1 −Lλαn
2
 GG×V,αn(yn)
2
−ηn

1 −Lληn
2
 GΠ,ηn(πn)
2.
(131)
Since Lλ ≥0 by definition (128), the sequence {Lλ(zn)} is nonincreasing for n ≥n0 and bounded below by 0. Hence it
converges, proving (1).
Summing (131) from n = n0 to T yields
T
X
n=n0
αn

1 −Lλαn
2
 GG×V,αn(yn)
2 +
T
X
n=n0
ηn

1 −Lληn
2
 GΠ,ηn(πn)
2 ≤Lλ(zn0) −Lλ(zT +1) ≤Lλ(zn0).
Letting T →∞implies both sums are finite. Since P
n ηn = ∞and P
n αn = ∞, the only way for the weighted sums to
be finite is that the corresponding norm terms must converge to 0 along the full sequence. This proves (2).
Step 4: Stationarity of accumulation points. Because Z is compact, {zn} has accumulation points. Let znj →z⋆be any
convergent subsequence. From (2) and continuity of the gradient mapping under smoothness, the limiting point satisfies
GΠ,0(π⋆) = 0 and GG×V,0(y⋆) = 0, which is equivalent to the first-order normal cone inclusion 0 ∈∇Lλ(z⋆) + NZ(z⋆)
for a projected-gradient method on a smooth function. This is the standard KKT characterization for constrained first-order
stationarity, proving (3).
I. Proof of Section 7
Theorem I.1. (1). For a sequence of discount factors {γt} →1, denote a Nash Equilibrium of the γt-discounted DR-MG
by πt. If πt →π, then π is a Nash Equilibrium of the average-reward DR-MG.
(2). For any ϵ, there exists some discount factor γ, such that any ϵ-Nash Equilibrium of the γ-discounted DR-MG is also an
O(ϵ)-Nash Equilibrium under the average reward.
(3). The discount factor γ = 1 −ϵ
D satisfies Part (2)
Proof. (1). By the uniform convergence of the robust discounted value function derived in (Wang et al., 2023b), we have
that
lim
γ→1(1 −γ)V π
γ,P,i = gπ
P,i, uniformly on Π.
(132)
Thus for any ϵ, there exists some γe, such that
∥(1 −γ)V π
γ,P,i −gπ
P,i∥≤ϵ,
(133)
53

Distributionally Robust Markov Games with Average Reward
for any π ∈Π and γ > γe. Moreover, there exists some constant T such that for any t > T,
γt > γe, ∥πt −π∥≤ϵ.
(134)
Since πt is the Nash Equilibrium of the discounted robust MG, it holds that
V πt
γt,P,i ≥V (π−i
t
,µi)
γt,P,i
, ∀i ∈N, ∀µi.
(135)
Thus we have that
g(π−i,µi)
P,i
−gπ
P,i
= −gπ
P,i + (1 −γt)V π
γt,P,i −(1 −γt)V π
γt,P,i + (1 −γt)V πt
γt,P,i
−(1 −γt)V πt
γt,P,i + (1 −γt)V (π−i
t
,µi)
γt,P,i
−(1 −γt)V (π−i
t
,µi)
γt,P,i
+ (1 −γt)V (π−i,µi)
γt,P,i
−(1 −γt)V (π−i,µi)
γt,P,i
+ g(π−i,µi)
P,i
.
(136)
Consider any t > T, it first holds that due to (133):
(1 −γt)V π
γt,P,i −gπ
P,i ≤ϵ,
(137)
g(π−i,µi)
P,i
−(1 −γt)V (π−i,µi)
γt,P,i
≤ϵ.
(138)
Moreover,
(1 −γt)V πt
γt,P,i −(1 −γt)V π
γt,P,i ≤(1 −γt)(V πt
γt,P,i −V π
γt,P,i) ≤ϵ,
(139)
(1 −γt)V (π−i,µi)
γt,P,i
−(1 −γt)V (π−i
t
,µi)
γt,P,i
≤ϵ,
(140)
which is due to the
1
1−γ -Lipschitz of the robust discounted value function in π, and the closeness of πt and π in (134).
Finally,
−(1 −γt)V πt
γt,P,i + (1 −γt)V (π−i
t
,µi)
γt,P,i
≤0
(141)
due to (135). Combining all results hence implies that
g(π−i,µi)
P,i
−gπ
P,i ≤ϵ,
(142)
for any i and µi uniformly. Thus let ϵ →0 we complete the proof.
(2). Set γ to be any factor that is larger than γe. Then
g(π−i,µi)
P,i
−gπ
P,i = g(π−i,µi)
P,i
−(1 −γ)V (π−i,µi)
γ,P,i
+ (1 −γ)V (π−i,µi)
γ,P,i
−(1 −γ)V π
γ,P,i + (1 −γ)V π
γ,P,i −gπ
P,i.
(143)
Note that for γ > γe, it holds that
g(π−i,µi)
P,i
−gπ
P,i ≤2ϵ + (1 −γ)V (π−i,µi)
γ,P,i
−(1 −γ)V π
γ,P,i ≤3ϵ,
(144)
due to π is an ϵ-NE for the discounted robust MG, which hence completes the proof.
(3). The proof is a direct corollary of Theorem 7.1 and results from (Roch et al., 2025a). Specifically, it is shown in Theorem
3.4 in (Roch et al., 2025a) that, for any γ > 1 −ϵ
D
4, it holds that
∥(1 −γ)V π
γ,P,i −gπ
P,i∥≤ϵ, ∀π, ∀i.
(145)
Combining with Theorem 7.1 further completes the proof.
4The results in (Roch et al., 2025a) is derived for H which is the robust optimal span. However, their results also hold for any constant
that is larger than H. Our claim thus holds by noting that D ≥H (Roch et al., 2025a).
54

Distributionally Robust Markov Games with Average Reward
J. Experiments
J.1. Experiments for Robust TD Algorithm
In this section, we provide numerical evidence that the proposed robust TD-descent algorithm (Algorithm 1) behaves in
accordance with the theoretical analysis.
For a joint policy π and gains/biases (g, V ) as in Definition H.2, we track the following quantities: (1). the global robust TD
gap ∆R(π, g, V ) as in Definition H.2. In the experiments, (g, V ) are always taken as the robust average-reward optimal
gain-bias pairs for the current induced DR-MDPs, as we specified in Algorithm 1; (2). the robust Nash gap for the policy
π: NashGap(π) := maxk∈N gapk(π) where gapk(π) := maxνk gνk,π−k
P,k
−gπ
P,k. We aim to show that, our Algorithm 1
ensures both ∆R(π, g, V ) and robust Nash gap converge to 0 (note that NashGap(π) = 0 implies π is a NE), validating our
theoretical results.
We consider a two-player, two-state, two-action DR-MG. The state space is S = {0, 1} and each player has two actions
Ak = {0, 1} at each state. The uncertain set over transitions is two-state rectangular: for each (s, a1, a2) the probability
p(s′ = 1 | s, a1, a2) lies in a fixed interval [pmin(s, a1, a2), pmax(s, a1, a2)], with the adversary choosing p to minimize
the player’s expected next-state bias. The intervals are chosen so that the Markov chain under any stationary joint policy
is irreducible, satisfying Assumption 4.1. The reward tensors rk(s, a1, a2) are randomly generated between [0, 1]. All
experiments are conducted in the planning setting: the reward functions and rectangular uncertainty sets are known, and
robust Bellman equations are solved through Relative Value Iteration (RVI) in (Wang et al., 2023c).
We then implement our Algorithm 1. In the experiments, we use 600 outer iterations. Figure 1 aggregates the results over
Ngames = 30 independent random games. The left panel shows the global robust TD gap ∆R(πn, gn, V n) as a function of
iteration, and the right panel shows the robust Nash gap NashGap(πn). The envelopes represent the standard deviations of
these 30 runs.
Figure 1. Robust TD
Across all random instances, we note that both ∆R and NashGap decrease steadily with the number of iterations, with
the mean curves decreasing and approaching to zero. These results are then consistent with our theoretical results in
Theorem 6.3, validating our TD-based algorithm and verifying our results.
J.2. Additional Experiments on Average Reward DR-MGs
In this section, we develop numerical experiments to validate the advantages of our formulation and methods. We mainly
consider two aspects: the long-term performance and the robustness to environment uncertainty.
J.2.1. LONG-TERM PERFORMANCE
To empirically validate our approach, we perform a series of experiments designed to compare the performance of our robust
Nash-Iteration algorithm with average reward against the standard discounted-reward robust Nash-Iteration (Zhang et al.,
55

Distributionally Robust Markov Games with Average Reward
2020; Shi et al., 2024) under DR-MGs. We aim to show that our algorithm will yield a joint policy that has better long-term
performance than those derived from the discounted criterion.
We design a ‘Structured Random Environment’ to create a complex strategic challenge with meaningful trade-offs between
short-term gains and long-term consequences. The environment is a DR-MG with 20 states and 5 actions. The state space S
is partitioned into two clusters:
• Prosperous States (|Sp| = 5): A small set of states characterized by a higher mean reward (drawn from N(2, 1)).
• Deprived States (|Sd| = 15): A larger set of states with a lower mean reward (drawn from N(−2, 1)),
where N(·, ·) is the Gaussian distribution. The nominal transition kernel P0 is also structured to create persistence within
these clusters. Transitions originating from a state in a given cluster are five times more likely to terminate in a state within
the same cluster. This design creates a strategic trap: an agent in a prosperous state might be tempted by an action with a
high immediate reward that carries a significant risk of transitioning it to the deprived cluster, from which escape is difficult.
We further set the uncertainty set using a Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence ball around the nominal kernel P0:
Pa
s = {q ∈∆(S) | DKL(q||(P0)a
s) ≤θ}.
Based on the scale of our environment, the uncertainty budget θ is set to a modest value of 0.01.
We compare our average-reward Robust Nash-Iteration algorithm (Algorithm 2) and the Discounted-Reward Robust Nash-
Iteration. We implement the two algorithms and evaluate their output policies under the robust average-reward criterion.
The experimental procedure is as follows:
(1). The optimal average-reward policy, πavg, is computed using the average-reward Robust Nash-Iteration algorithm. We
evaluate the worst-case average reward of Player 1 under the policy, using the robust average reward single-agent RL method
in (Wang et al., 2023b).
(2). For a range of discount factors γ from 0.5 to 0.99, the corresponding optimal discounted policy, πdisc(γ), is computed
using the Discounted-Reward Robust Nash-Iteration algorithm. And for each πdisc(γ), we similarly evaluate its worst-case
long-term performance.
For both algorithms, we plot the performance of Player 1 as a performance metric. Results are presented in Figure 2 (under
different random environments). Policies learned under the discounted criterion consistently underperform the dedicated
average-reward policy. This gap is most pronounced for smaller values of γ, where the myopic nature of the discounted
algorithm leads it to fall into the strategic trap of the environment by choosing actions that yield high immediate rewards but
lead to the persistent, low-reward ”deprived” cluster of states. As γ approaches 1, the discounted policy becomes more
far-sighted, and its performance converges toward the optimal baseline.
Our results hence provide strong evidence that, for DRMGs under the average reward criterion with long-term performance
optimization goals, our robust Nash-Iteration algorithm achieves a better performance, compared to the common practice of
approximating this objective with a discounted formulation using γ ≈1.
J.2.2. ROBUSTNESS
We then test the robustness of our method by comparing it with the non-robust average-reward Nash-Iteration algorithm
(Li, 2003), to test their ability to handle model uncertainty. Using the same environment, we evaluate both learners against
a worst-case adversary throughout training to measure their inherent robustness. The results are presented in Figure 3.
The policy learned by the robust algorithm consistently and monotonically improves its worst-case performance, rapidly
converging to a high, stable value. This is because the algorithm directly optimizes for resilience against the adversary at
each step. In contrast, the policy learned by the non-robust algorithm exhibits lower performance when evaluated against
a worst-case adversary. Ultimately, it does not have the ability to reliably account for perturbations in the underlying
environment, as opposed to its robust counterpart, which aligns with our theoretical results.
These numerical results therefore verify that our method achieves superior long-term performance with increased stability
in the presence of model uncertainty in multi-agent systems, validating our theoretical results.
56

Distributionally Robust Markov Games with Average Reward
Figure 2. Performance Comparisons of Average and Discounted Robust Nash-Iteration
Figure 3. Performance Comparisons of Robust/Non-Robust Nash-Iteration
57
