 
 
Abstract— 
Reinforcement 
learning 
(RL), 
given 
its 
adaptability and generality, has great potential to optimize 
online traffic signal control strategies. Although studies have 
proposed various RL-based signal controllers and validated 
them offline, very few examine the robustness of the trained RL-
based controllers when deployed in a dynamic traffic 
environment. This paper proposed a multi-agent reinforcement 
learning algorithm for traffic signal control and developed a 
general multi-agent optimization simulation tool to evaluate 
different signal control methods. A transfer learning technique 
is applied to test the robustness of the proposed algorithm and 
traditional control approaches under different traffic scenarios, 
including stochastic traffic flow, varying traffic volume, and 
uncertain sensor data. The experimental results show that the 
proposed RL-based control method is robust under stochastic 
traffic flow and variation traffic demand patterns, and it 
outperforms the fixed-time and vehicle-actuated methods. 
However, it is unstable in the case of highly noisy sensor data. 
Also, the trained RL-based controller can continuously learn 
online and improve its performance by interacting with the 
dynamic traffic environment, especially when the traffic is 
congested, and the sensor has noisy observations.  
 INTRODUCTION 
The trends toward urbanization are accelerating globally, 
with 55% of the population projected to live in cities by 2050 
[1]. The rising demand for travel has been outpacing the 
expansion of road capacity in cities, which leads to traffic 
congestion and negative externalities, such as green gas 
emission and energy consumption. Traffic signal control, 
focusing on increasing road capacity, has long been used as 
an effective traffic management strategy. Traditional traffic 
signal control approaches used in practice are fixed-time and 
vehicle actuated [2].  A fixed-time controller determines the 
optimal signal timing plans using historical traffic 
information, while an actuated signal controller reacts to real-
time traffic conditions and adjusts signal timings, in most 
cases, using greedy strategies (e.g., myopic with no 
consideration of future traffic conditions).  
To overcome these limitations, the adaptive signal 
control approach has been proposed and widely studied [3, 
4]. It adapts the signal timing plans based on both the 
observed and anticipated traffic conditions [5]. Many studies 
developed mathematical models for adaptive signal control 
[6-9]. Such models suffer from the assumption on the traffic 
 
Chunliang Wu is with the Institute of Transport Studies, Department of 
Civil Engineering, Monash University, Clayton, VIC, 3800, Australia (e-
mail: Chunliang.Wu@monash.edu).  
Zhenliang Ma is with the Institute of Transport Studies, Department of 
Civil Engineering, Monash University, Clayton, VIC, 3800, Australia (e-
mail: Mike.Ma@monash.edu). 
dynamics, which could be highly complex, dynamic, and 
stochastic. Thus, it is hardly possible to describe it precisely 
in practice. With the advancement of information 
communication technologies (ICT) in transportation, many 
model-free control approaches, such as fuzzy logic and 
heuristic algorithms, have been proposed [10-12], but they 
require expert knowledge in design and usually have low 
converging rate, which limits their ability for online use. 
In light of the limitations of the optimal control-based 
signal control approaches, self-learning-based signal control 
has been widely studied in the computer science field and 
recently attracted increasing interests in transportation 
sectors. Reinforcement learning (RL), one of machine 
learning techniques, enables agents to interact with the 
dynamic environment to learn optimal behavior by trial and 
error [13]. It can find (sub)optimal control policy by self-
learning and does not need human intervention. Many studies 
developed RL-based signal controllers and affirmed their 
better offline performance, in terms of accuracy at the 
converged state, by comparing with traditional traffic signal 
control methods [14-16]. However, it is not clear about their 
performance for online applications. Actually, there would 
be no purpose for an RL-based signal controller that is not 
applied in an online traffic environment, as they are meant to 
control dynamic systems.  
The research aims to develop a general multi-agent RL-
based signal control platform and explore the robustness of 
traffic signal control algorithms under various settings. The 
platform integrates an RL controller in python and a micro 
traffic simulator in VISSIM. It is general and capable of 
evaluating a spectrum of traffic control strategies under 
varied traffic scenarios, such as network layouts, traffic 
demand, and flow patterns. The paper proposes a 
decentralized multi-agent RL-based signal control method 
for online applications, which is scalable to the network of 
different scales. A transfer learning technique is designed to 
test the robustness of the proposed RL-based algorithm and 
state-of-the-art signal control methods under scenarios of 
varied congestion conditions (e.g., extremely congested), 
traffic flow patterns (e.g., random arrivals), and information 
uncertainty (e.g., observation noise). To the best of our 
knowledge, this is the first attempt to test the robustness of 
the optimal multi-agent RL signal control model with 
transfer learning techniques.
Inhi Kim is with the Institute of Transport Studies, Department of Civil 
Engineering, Monash University, Clayton, VIC, 3800, Australia 
(corresponding author; e-mail: Inhi.Kim@monash.edu).  
Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning for Traffic Signal Control: 
Algorithms and Robustness Analysis 
Chunliang Wu, Student Member, IEEE, Zhenliang Ma, and Inhi Kim 
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Texas at Arlington. Downloaded on June 27,2026 at 06:10:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

 
 
TABLE I.  A SUMMARY OF RL-BASED TRAFFIC SIGNAL CONTROL METHODS
References 
RL Algorithm 
RL Value Function 
Approximator 
Phase 
sequence 
State 
Reward 
Network 
Scale 
Benchmark 
Performance 
metric 
Wiering [17] 
Model-based 
Q-learning 
Table 
Variable 
Position of 
vehicles 
Delay 
6 
Fixed, 
Random, 
Greedy 
Accuracy 
Arel, et al. [18] 
Q-learning 
Neural network 
Variable 
Delay 
Delay 
5 
LQF 
Accuracy 
Aslani, et al. 
[19] 
Q-learning, 
SARSA, 
Actor-critic 
Tile coding 
Fixed 
Queue, Arrival 
vehicles, Phase 
Queue, Arrival 
vehicles 
50 
Fixed-time 
Accuracy, 
Robustness 
El-Tantawy, et 
al. [14] 
Q-learning, 
SARSA, TD(λ) 
Table 
Fixed, 
Variable 
Queue, Arrival 
vehicles, Delay 
Delay, Queue, 
Stops 
59 
Fixed-time, 
Actuated 
Accuracy 
Mousavi, et al. 
[15] 
Q-learning, 
Actor-critic 
DNN 
Fixed 
Image 
Delay 
1 
Fixed-time 
Accuracy 
Li, et al. [20] 
Q-learning 
DNN 
Fixed 
Queue 
Queue 
1 
Conventional 
RL 
Accuracy 
Liang, et al. 
[16] 
Q-learning 
DNN 
Fixed 
Position and 
speed of 
vehicles 
Waiting time 
1 
Fixed-time 
Accuracy 
Rodrigues and 
Azevedo [21] 
Q-learning 
DNN 
Fixed, 
Variable 
Queue, Phase 
Queue 
1 
Fixed-time, 
Actuated 
Accuracy, 
Robustness 
Chu, et al. [22] 
Actor-critic 
DNN 
Variable 
Delay, Arrival 
vehicles 
Queue, Delay 
25 
Greedy, IQL 
Accuracy 
 RELATED WORK 
This section focuses on the studies that applied RL for 
traffic signal control.  Table І summarizes and compares the 
studies with respect to the following aspects: RL algorithms, 
RL value function approximators, control strategies (phases, 
states, and rewards), experiment designs (road network scale, 
benchmark, and performance metrics). 
Two types of RL algorithms, namely model-based and 
model-free approaches, are used for the design of traffic 
signal controllers [14, 17, 19]. For the model-based approach, 
an exact model is required to describe the environment 
adequately, and the agent uses it to find an optimal policy 
[23]. Although the model-based RL method is more efficient 
in convergence and data requirement compared with the 
model-free RL method, building an exact model describing 
the stochastic traffic environment is not trivial or hardly 
possible. Thus, the model-free RL method is more frequently 
used in the literature. The model-free RL is further divided 
into value-based (Q-learning and State-action-reward-state-
action (SARSA)) and policy-based (Actor-critic) methods 
[14, 22]. Earlier studies mainly used the discrete model-free 
RL, which stores the estimated state-action values in tabular 
form [17]. However, it is impossible to trace all station-action 
pairs in a complex traffic environment, given the massive 
number of station-action pairs. To address that challenge, 
several 
studies 
proposed 
various 
value 
function 
approximators such as tile coding and neural network to 
estimate state-action pairs [18, 19]. Recently, with the rise of 
machine learning, deep learning algorithms are endowed 
with strong predictive ability. Thus, several studies have 
attempted to use deep neural networks (DNN) to approximate 
objective functions [15, 16, 20]. One common issue is that 
most of those studies focus on signal control for one 
intersection.   
Regardless of the solution algorithm, the key challenges 
for an effective RL-based signal controller are definitions of 
states, actions, and rewards, which are problem-specific. In 
the previous studies, queue length, cumulative vehicle delay, 
and the number of vehicles arriving at intersections are 
commonly used to characterize the environment state. More 
recently, some studies attempt to use an image as the state to 
obtain more comprehensive traffic environment information 
[15]. However, extracting useful information from images 
needs a large number of samples, and the training process is 
time-consuming. Even if a model can continuously extract 
traffic state information, it does not necessarily guarantee that 
an agent can learn a better signal control policy. Action 
definition is based on signal phases. For the multi-phase 
intersections, studies often assume that the agents can 
randomly select a phase without considering the pre-defined 
phase sequence. Frequently changing phase sequence is not 
practical and could confuse drivers and cause safety concerns 
[16]. Also, the immediate reward is usually measured by 
queue length and travel delay. However, the travel delay of 
vehicles is rather difficult to collect in the real-world.  
Another challenge is how to guarantee the robustness of 
the signal controllers under a real traffic environment with 
complex and dynamic traffic and noisy observations from 
sensors. Most studies in the literature validated the proposed 
RL-based algorithms offline about their convergence 
accuracy; however, it is not clear about the robustness of 
these algorithms in an online traffic environment.  Aslani, et 
al. [19] firstly attempted to test the robustness of different RL 
algorithms 
against 
system 
disturbances 
for 
multi 
intersections. They found that the value-based RL is lack of 
robustness under perturbations. After training for a couple of 
hours, the policy-based RL can handle the disturbances. It is 
worth noting that tile coding is used as an approximator to 
estimate the value-function. The estimation accuracy of this 
method is questionable. It might lead to the instability of RL-
based control algorithms. Rodrigues and Azevedo [21] 
designed an RL-based controller for an isolated intersection 
and evaluated its robustness under varying demand and 
sensor failures. They found that the RL algorithm performs 
better only when the phase sequence is varied. They also 
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Texas at Arlington. Downloaded on June 27,2026 at 06:10:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

 
pointed out that in order to develop a robust RL-based signal 
control algorithm, it is essential to extract more 
comprehensive traffic state information for offline training.  
The paper addresses the gaps and the contribution is 
threefold: (1) developing a general optimization and 
simulation platform for multi-agent RL-based traffic signal 
control; (2) proposing a decentralized multi-agent RL model 
and solution algorithm for online applications with available 
data in the real-world; (3) examining the robustness of multi-
agent RL algorithms under scenarios of stochastic arrivals, 
varied traffic demand as well as information uncertainties. 
 PROBLEM STATEMENT 
The considered road network consists of multi-
intersections. Let I  denotes the number of intersections. 
Each intersection equips with a signal controller including 
multi-signal groups. A signal group has three signals 
including green, yellow, and red. Without loss of generality, 
only red and green signals are considered. A signal controller 
can communicate with neighboring signal controllers. Real-
time traffic flow information at intersections is available 
(from camera or loop detectors). The objective is to propose 
an online self-learning algorithm to adapt traffic signal 
timings at multi-intersections to reduce traffic congestion.  
Fig. 1 shows the research framework. The problem is 
modeled using Markov Decision Process (MDP) framework 
with the objective of minimizing vehicle delay. A learning-
based signal controller is developed using RL algorithms and 
trained in an offline environment. Then, the learned 
knowledge is transferred to the signal controller in an online 
traffic environment. The robustness of the proposed method 
is tested under different scenarios, including random arrivals, 
varying traffic demand patterns, and system disturbances. 
 METHOD 
A. MDP Control 
We formulate the traffic signal control problem using 
MDP framework. The elements of MDP include states, 
actions, and rewards. 
1) States: The state for each intersection consists of four 
components. The first component is the current phase of the 
intersection i . The second one is the elapsed time of the 
current green signal. The third state vector is the total number 
of vehicles in the lanes (discharging in the same signal 
phase). This indicator can be obtained using the following 
steps. The cameras at the intersection firstly collect the 
number of vehicles in each lane. Depending on the view 
distance of cameras, the number of vehicles on a section of 
road can be obtained, such as vehicles within 100 m of the 
intersection i . Next, the lanes have the same signal phase are 
combined into a group. For example, the lane has the same 
background color are combined in Fig. 2. Then, the vehicles 
in the same group are summed. Finally, this state vector is 


1
2
,
,...,
i
i
i
n
q q
q
, where 
i
n
q  is the number of vehicles in the 
lanes with the same signal phase, and n  is the number of 
signal phases at the intersection i . The forth state vector is 
the current phase of the neighboring intersections of the 
intersection i . 
2) Actions: In this research, the phase sequence is fixed 
for all intersections for safety concerns in practice. There are 
two actions for each intersection that can be selected. One is 
to extend the current phase. Another is to terminate the 
current phase and change it to the next phase. To guarantee 
the stability of learning, the signal controller will select an 
action every 
t
 seconds, e.g. 10 seconds. In addition, to 
reduce the exploration space and improve the robustness, we 
constrain that the signal controller must change to the next 
phase if vehicle detectors (located in the lanes discharging 
vehicles) are occupied for less than a certain threshold of the 
current time step, e.g. 30%. The minimum and maximum 
duration of each signal phase are also set.  
3) Reward function: It is hard to collect vehicle delay 
data in practice. Thus, the immediate reward for a given 
intersection i  is denoted as the number of vehicles passing 
through it at the time step 
t
: 
.
i
i
i
t
t
t
t
r
p
p



                                (1) 
This measure can be collected from loop detectors (green 
colored in Fig. 2). 
 
Figure 1.  The framework of this research. 
 
Figure 2.  Illustration of data acquisition devices at an intersection with 
four phases. 
 Control Algorithm 
Each signal controller is a learning-based agent and 
independently learns its own control strategy. Suppose that at 
a time t , the agent at the intersection i  receives the state of 
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Texas at Arlington. Downloaded on June 27,2026 at 06:10:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

 
the environment 
i
ts . It then selects an action 
i
i
ta
A

. After 
taking this action, the agent receives a reward 
i
tr , and the 
traffic environment moves to the next state 
1
i
ts . The goal of 
the learning-based agent i  is to find an optimal policy 
*
 
that maximizes the expected rewards from all states [13]. 
Q-learning, one of the RL algorithms, is applied in this 
research to solve the above RL problem. Q-learning uses a 
value 
function 


,
Q s a
 to 
estimate 
the 
expected 
performance of taking an action a  in a given state s . It 
updates the estimated value function based on a greedy action 
with the highest Q-value. In fact, this action might not be 
taken. The Q-values are updated as follows: 
          










1
,
,
max
,
,
,
t
t
t
t
t
t
t
t
a
Q s a
Q s a
r
Q s
a
Q s a







          (2) 
where 
tr  is the reward received when the environment moves 
from the state 
ts  to the state 
1
ts , 


0,1

 is a learning rate, 


0,1

 is a discount factor, and 


1
max
,
t
a
Q s
a

 represents 
the maximum attainable award in the state 
1
ts . A higher 
learning rate  means Q-values are updated quickly, and 
vice versa. Also, a higher discount factor  indicates that the 
agent concerns more about long-term future rewards.  
The state-action pairs of traffic signal control problems 
are too large to store them in a finite Q-table. Thus, this 
research applies a deep neural network (DNN) as a function 
approximation to estimate the Q-value function. To 
accelerate the convergence speed and improve the stability of 
deep Q network (DQN), a dueling architecture is used as 
shown in Fig. 3. The Q-value function is estimated using two 
separate streams. One is used for estimating the state-value 
function 


;
V s 
. The other is used for estimating the 
advantage function 


, ;
A s a 
 which characterizes the 
advantage of taking action a  in the state s [24]. The Q-value 
function is calculated as follows: 
   








'
, ; ,
;
1
, ;
-
,
';
,
a
Q s a
V s
A s a
A s a
A















         (3)  
where  and  are the parameters of two streams, and


'
1
,
';
a
A s a
A


 is the average advantage of all actions.  
The training process of the dueling architecture is the 
same as the standard DQN architecture to minimize the 
following loss functions at iteration i : 
 
  
               





2
, , , '
, ;
,
i
i
s a r s
i
i
L
y
Q s a







            (4) 
with  
                             


'
max
',
';
.
i
a
y
r
Q s a




                   (5) 
where 
 is the parameters of a fixed and separate target 
network [24]. The gradient descent algorithm is used to 
update the parameter . 
Also, to address the instability of the learning process and 
speed up learning, experience relay buffer is used to store the 
previous experience, and a mini-batch of experience from 
this buffer is randomly selected to train the deep neural 
networks. By using this technique, the temporal correlations 
between successive samples are broken. 
 Transfer Learning 
As mentioned, this research aims to evaluate the 
robustness of the proposed RL algorithm in a real traffic 
environment. Transfer learning is used. Transfer learning is 
to apply knowledge learned in solving a source task (e.g., 
training tasks) to a target task (e.g., test tasks) [25]. In our 
context, transfer learning is to transfer the offline trained RL 
signal control model to an online environment, while the 
trained model will keep learning and adjusting with new 
observations available in real-time.  
For a value-based RL, three main types of knowledge 
could 
be 
transferred, 
including 
samples, 
function 
approximators, and parameters. The simplest version of 
transfer learning is to reuse the samples collected from 
different source tasks in a similar task. The function 
approximators, such as DNN can also be reused to a new task. 
Normally, these approximators can represent a certain task, 
and they will be refined continuously in solving a new task. 
The RL algorithms include a set of parameters such as 
learning rate and discount factor. The parameters used in a 
source task can be transferred as the initial values in a target 
task. In this research, both the function approximators and RL 
parameters from the training task are transferred to the test 
task. 
 
Figure 3.  Dueling architecture. 
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Texas at Arlington. Downloaded on June 27,2026 at 06:10:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

 
 CASE STUDY 
In this section, we design experiments to evaluate the 
performance of our proposed control method and examine its 
robustness in different scenarios compared with signal 
control methods often used in practice.  
 Experiment Design 
1) Simulation Environment: The experiments are 
conducted on a developed platform integrating a RL 
controller and microsimulation environment in VISSIM. The 
VISSIM provides a user-friendly Graphical User Interface 
(GUI). Via GUI, different types of road networks can be set. 
Also, the RL controller, built-in Python, communicates with 
VISSIM through the COM Interface. Via the COM, the RL 
controller can collect the traffic state information in real-time 
and control the traffic signals in the road network. A road 
network with four signalized intersections (in Fig. 4) is used 
for the experiments. The distance between the two 
intersections is 150m. The geometry of each intersection is 
the same shown in Fig. 2. The signal controller, installed at 
each intersection, contains four phases with a fixed phase 
sequence. The minimal and maximal duration of each phase 
is set to be 10s and 50s, respectively. The system is controlled 
in a decentralized mode shown in Fig. 4.  
To improve the robustness of our trained RL model and 
reduce the overfitting problem, the traffic volume of each link 
changes every 10 mins for the base case. Table II shows the 
average traffic volume per hour of each link. We assume that 
traffic flow is evenly distributed in each lane, and vehicles do 
not change their lanes when signal plans change. Also, traffic 
flow from different directions is not always oversaturated. 
2) Evaluation Metrics: The objective of the proposed 
method is to minimize vehicle delay. Thus, this research will 
evaluate whether this independent control method will reduce 
the average delay of the whole network.  
3) Baseline Control Methods: Two traditional control 
methods are used for comparison, including the fixed-time 
control and actuated control.  The signal plan of fixed-time 
control is optimized using the Webster method [26].  For the 
actuated control, the minimum duration of each phase is set 
to be 10s. The discharging rate of each phase is different. 
Each phase has a different maximum duration, which is set 
based on the green time of each phase in the fixed-time 
control. To reduce the wasted green time, the detector is 
installed at 50m from the stop line and the gap out time is set 
to be 4s. It means that if a vehicle traverses the loop detector 
that is activated, the current phase will be extended by 4s. 
 Experiment Setting 
1) Simulation Parameters: For the base scenario, the 
RL-based model is trained for 150 episodes. Each episode is 
simulated for the 3600s with 5 mins warm-up time. Then, the 
knowledge learned from the base scenarios is transferred 
online to optimize signal timings in the test scenarios. Note 
that to collect enough experience for online learning, the 
parameters of DNN are fixed for a few episodes, e.g. 6 
episodes. After that, they are updated. 
 
 
TABLE II. THE TRAFFIC VOLUME OF EACH LINK 
 
Link 
Volume 
(1000 
veh/h) 
A 
B 
C 
D 
E 
F 
G 
H 
I 
J 
2.1 
1.3 
1.4 
1.3 
1.4 
1.3 
1.4 
1.3 
1.4 
2.1 
 
 
Figure 4.  The geometry of the road network and the agent-based control 
framework for the four signalized intersections. 
2) RL Model Parameters: For the RL algorithm, the 
learning rate  and discount factor  are set to be 0.0001 
and 0.9, respectively. The minibatch size is 32, and the replay 
buffer size is 20,000. To obtain maximum future rewards, 
exploration vs. exploitation trade-off is a dilemma frequently 
faced in selecting an action. In this research, the -greedy 
approach is adopted. The exploration rate is from 95% to 5% 
during the first 50 training episodes.  
 Performance Validation  
Fig. 5 demonstrates the converging process for the four 
intersection agents during the offline training episodes. It can 
be seen that during the first 50 episodes, the cumulative 
rewards received by agents constantly increase, and then they 
tend to be stable. As mentioned before, the agents learn the 
optimal control policy by continuous trial and error during 
the first 50 episodes.  After that, the agents strengthen the 
knowledge they have learned. It is worth noting that there is 
a slight decrease in the cumulative reward for the agent at 
intersection 2. The reason for this might be that the traffic 
state of the intersection 2 is relatively non-stationary 
compared with that of the intersection 1 and 4. The state of 
the intersection 2 is determined not only by itself but also by 
the two neighboring intersections. It indicates that the 
exploration space for this agent is larger than other 
intersections.  Also, the agents are allowed to have a 5 % 
chance to explore new control policies. It might lead to the 
cumulative rewards for the agent at intersection 2 fluctuate.   
Fig. 6 shows the performance of the proposed algorithm 
and two control methods. After the 50 offline training 
episodes, the average delay per vehicle for the agent-based 
system tends to converge to a suboptimal value, and the 
performance of the proposed algorithm is better than the 
baseline control methods.  Also, the partial enlargement of 
Fig. 6 shows that with the increase in the training time, the 
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Texas at Arlington. Downloaded on June 27,2026 at 06:10:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

 
average delay of the agent-based system decreases. It 
indicates that the agents update their control policy when they 
have more experience. The final training results show that the 
average delay per vehicle in the whole road network of the 
agent-based system reduces 29.1% and 16.1% compared with 
the fixed-time control and the actuated control methods, 
respectively.  
 
Figure 5.  The cumulative reward for the four intersection agents during 
the offline training episodes. 
 
Figure 6.  The average delay per vehicle in the road network during the 
offline training episodes. 
 Sensitivity Analysis 
To examine the robustness of the offline trained RL 
model in an online environment, we design three scenarios, 
including stochastic traffic flow, varying demand, and 
uncertain observations.   
1) Stochastic Traffic Flow: Different random seeds are 
used for each simulation episode to describe stochastic traffic 
flow. Fig. 7 demonstrates that the average delay of the entire 
road network for the three control methods varies with the 
random traffic flow. Although the average delay of the agent-
based system changes greater than the other two methods in 
random arrivals, its performance is better than them.  
2) Traffic Demand Patterns: We test the performance of 
the proposed algorithm under low and high traffic demand. 
For the low and high traffic demand, we use 0.8 times and 
1.2 times the demand of the base scenario, respectively. Fig. 
8 and Fig. 9 show that the performance of the agent-based 
system is better than the fixed-time and actuated control 
methods under low and high demand scenarios. Note that the 
vertical lines in Figs. 8-10 represent that the parameters of 
DNN are fixed for six episodes. After that, they are updated. 
The 
agent-based 
system 
continuously 
improves 
its 
performance by interacting with the online environment, 
especially under the high demand scenario. 
 
Figure 7.  The performance of the proposed algorithm and benchmarks 
under stochastic flow during the online testing episodes. 
 
Figure 8.  The performance of the proposed algorithm and benchmarks 
under low traffic demand during the online testing episodes. 
 
Figure 9.  The performance of the proposed algorithm and benchmarks 
under high traffic demand during the online testing episodes. 
3) Sensor Noise: In practice, the data collected from 
sensors might have noise. Thus, in this research, synthetic 
noise is added to the observations. The cameras do not always 
obtain the number of vehicles on the approaching lanes 
accurately. Gaussian noise distribution is applied to simulate 
this situation. For example, if the sensor noise is 10, it 
indicates the number of vehicles collected from the devices 
floats up and down by ten on the basis of the exact value. Fig. 
10 shows that the performance of the RL-based method is 
relatively stable when the sensor noise is less than 20. Also, 
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Texas at Arlington. Downloaded on June 27,2026 at 06:10:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

 
although the RL-based method has a bad performance at the 
beginning of online testing when the sensor data is too noisy, 
it will keep improving its performance as the online testing 
time increases. 
 
Figure 10.  The performance of the proposed algorithm and benchmarks 
under uncertain sensor data during the online testing episodes. 
 CONCLUSION 
This research proposes a decentralized multi-agent RL 
algorithm for traffic signal control. A transfer learning 
technique is applied to test the robustness of the proposed 
RL-based algorithm and the methods commonly used in 
practice under scenarios including stochastic traffic flow, 
varying traffic demand, and information uncertainty. The 
results show that the online performance of a well-designed 
RL signal control algorithm is better than the fixed-time and 
actuated methods. Also, the agent-based system enables to 
update its control policies by interacting with an online traffic 
environment, which is impossible for the rule-based control 
methods.  
In the future, this research can be extended to investigate 
the robustness of RL-based signal control methods in a 
complex traffic environment such as a real network with 
route choice possibilities and changes in traffic split 
fractions. Also, future work can study how other theories, 
such as optimal control theory, can be applied to strengthen 
the robustness of RL-based signal control methods.  
REFERENCES 
 
[1] 
J. A. Goldstone, "The new population bomb: the four megatrends 
that will change the world," Foreign Aff., vol. 89, p. 31, 2010. 
[2] 
K.-L. A. Yau, J. Qadir, H. L. Khoo, M. H. Ling, and P. 
Komisarczuk, "A Survey on Reinforcement Learning Models 
and Algorithms for Traffic Signal Control," ACM Computing 
Surveys, vol. 50, no. 3, pp. 1-38, 2017. 
[3] 
Y. Wang, X. Yang, H. Liang, and Y. Liu, "A Review of the Self-
Adaptive Traffic Signal Control System Based on Future Traffic 
Environment," Journal of Advanced Transportation, vol. 2018, 
pp. 1-12, 2018. 
[4] 
K. Pandit, D. Ghosal, H. M. Zhang, and C.-N. Chuah, "Adaptive 
traffic signal control with vehicular ad hoc networks," IEEE 
Transactions on Vehicular Technology, vol. 62, no. 4, pp. 1459-
1471, 2013. 
[5] 
M. Aslani, M. S. Mesgari, and M. Wiering, "Adaptive traffic 
signal control with actor-critic methods in a real-world traffic 
network with different traffic disruption events," Transportation 
Research Part C: Emerging Technologies, vol. 85, pp. 732-752, 
2017. 
[6] 
P. Hunt, D. Robertson, R. Bretherton, and M. C. Royle, "The 
SCOOT on-line traffic signal optimisation technique," Traffic 
Engineering & Control, vol. 23, no. 4, 1982. 
[7] 
P. R. Lowrie, "SCATS: The Sydney co-ordinated adaptive traffic 
system–Principles, methodol-16 ogy, algorithms," in Proc. IEE 
International Conference on Road Traffic Signalling, London, 
1982, vol. 17, pp. 67-70. 
[8] 
N. H. Gartner, "OPAC: Strategy for Demand-responsive 
Decentralized Traffic Signal Control," IFAC Proceedings 
Volumes, vol. 23, no. 2, pp. 241-244, 1990. 
[9] 
P. Mirchandani and L. Head, "A real-time traffic signal control 
system system: architecture, algorithms, and analysis," 
Transportation Research Part C: Emerging Technologies, vol. 9, 
no. 6, pp. 415-432, 2001. 
[10] 
J. Qiao, N. Yang, and J. Gao, "Two-stage fuzzy logic controller 
for signalized intersection," IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man, 
and Cybernetics-Part A: Systems and Humans, vol. 41, no. 1, pp. 
178-184, 2010. 
[11] 
D. Srinivasan, M. C. Choy, and R. L. Cheu, "Neural Networks 
for Real-Time Traffic Signal Control," IEEE Transactions on 
Intelligent Transportation Systems, vol. 7, no. 3, pp. 261-272, 
2006. 
[12] 
J. Lee, B. Abdulhai, A. Shalaby, and E.-H. Chung, "Real-Time 
Optimization for Adaptive Traffic Signal Control Using Genetic 
Algorithms," Journal of Intelligent Transportation Systems, vol. 
9, no. 3, pp. 111-122, 2006. 
[13] 
K. Arulkumaran, M. P. Deisenroth, M. Brundage, and A. A. 
Bharath, "Deep Reinforcement Learning: A Brief Survey," IEEE 
Signal Processing Magazine, vol. 34, no. 6, pp. 26-38, 2017. 
[14] 
S. El-Tantawy, B. Abdulhai, and H. Abdelgawad, "Design of 
Reinforcement Learning Parameters for Seamless Application of 
Adaptive Traffic Signal Control," Journal of Intelligent 
Transportation Systems, vol. 18, no. 3, pp. 227-245, 2014. 
[15] 
S. S. Mousavi, M. Schukat, and E. Howley, "Traffic light control 
using 
deep 
policy-gradient 
and 
value-function-based 
reinforcement learning," IET Intelligent Transport Systems, vol. 
11, no. 7, pp. 417-423, 2017. 
[16] 
X. Liang, X. Du, G. Wang, and Z. Han, "A Deep Reinforcement 
Learning Network for Traffic Light Cycle Control," IEEE 
Transactions on Vehicular Technology, vol. 68, no. 2, pp. 1243-
1253, 2019. 
[17] 
M. Wiering, "Multi-agent reinforcement learning for traffic light 
control," in Machine Learning: Proceedings of the Seventeenth 
International Conference (ICML'2000), 2000, pp. 1151-1158. 
[18] 
I. Arel, C. Liu, T. Urbanik, and A. G. Kohls, "Reinforcement 
learning-based multi-agent system for network traffic signal 
control," IET Intelligent Transport Systems, vol. 4, no. 2, 2010. 
[19] 
M. Aslani, S. Seipel, M. S. Mesgari, and M. Wiering, "Traffic 
signal 
optimization 
through 
discrete 
and 
continuous 
reinforcement learning with robustness analysis in downtown 
Tehran," Advanced Engineering Informatics, vol. 38, pp. 639-
655, 2018. 
[20] 
L. Li, Y. Lv, and F.-Y. Wang, "Traffic signal timing via deep 
reinforcement learning," IEEE/CAA Journal of Automatica 
Sinica, vol. 3, no. 3, pp. 247-254, 2016. 
[21] 
F. Rodrigues and C. L. Azevedo, "Towards Robust Deep 
Reinforcement Learning for Traffic Signal Control: Demand 
Surges, Incidents and Sensor Failures," in 2019 IEEE Intelligent 
Transportation Systems Conference (ITSC), 2019, pp. 3559-
3566: IEEE. 
[22] 
T. Chu, J. Wang, L. Codeca, and Z. Li, "Multi-Agent Deep 
Reinforcement Learning for Large-Scale Traffic Signal Control," 
IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems, pp. 1-
10, 2019. 
[23] 
J. Jin and X. Ma, "Hierarchical multi-agent control of traffic 
lights based on collective learning," Engineering Applications of 
Artificial Intelligence, vol. 68, pp. 236-248, 2018. 
[24] 
Z. Wang, T. Schaul, M. Hessel, H. Van Hasselt, M. Lanctot, and 
N. De Freitas, "Dueling network architectures for deep 
reinforcement learning," arXiv preprint arXiv:1511.06581, 2015. 
[25] 
M. Wiering and M. Van Otterlo, "Reinforcement learning," 
Adaptation, learning, and optimization, vol. 12, p. 3, 2012. 
[26] 
F. V. Webster, "Traffic signal settings," 1958. 
 
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Texas at Arlington. Downloaded on June 27,2026 at 06:10:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
