 
Fei Miao
Song Han  
University of Connecticut 
In cooperation with U.S. Department of Transportation,
Office of the Assistant Secretary for Research and Technology (OST-R) 
Grant #: 69A3552348301
5G-enabled Safe and 
Robust Deep Multi-
Agent Reinforcement 
Learning Framework 
for CAV Coordination 
June 2025 
Region 1: 
New England University Transportation Center  

TECHNICAL DOCUMENTATION 
1. Project No.
161157
2. Government Accession No.
 01904668
3. Recipient’s Catalog No.
4. Title and Subtitle
5G-enabled Safe and Robust Deep Multi-agent Reinforcement 
Learning Framework for CAV Coordination
 
5. Report Date 
June 2025
6. Performing Organization Code
N/A
7. Author(s)
Fei Miao 0000-0003-0066-4379
Song Han 0000-0002-1491-7675
8. Performing Organization Report No.
N/A
9. Performing Organization Name and Address
New England University Transportation Center 
181 Presidents Drive 
University of Massachusetts - Amherst 
Amherst, MA 01003 
10. Work Unit No. (TRAIS)
11. Contract or Grant No. 
69A3552348301
12. Sponsoring Agency Name and Address
United States Department of Transportation 
Research and Innovative Technology Administration 
1200 New Jersey Avenue, SE 
Washington, DC 20590 
13. Type of Report and Period Covered
Final Research Report
14. Sponsoring Agency Code
USDOT OST-R
15. Supplementary Notes
Report uploaded and accessible at the NEUTC Website (www.umass.edu/neutc)
16. Abstract
We address the problem of coordination and control of Connected and Automated Vehicles (CAVs) in the 
presence of imperfect observations in mixed traffic environment. A commonly used approach is learning-based 
decision-making, such as reinforcement learning (RL). However, most existing safe RL methods suffer from two 
limitations: (i) they assume accurate state information, and (ii) safety is generally defined over the expectation of 
the trajectories. It remains challenging to design optimal coordination between multi-agents while ensuring hard 
safety constraints under system state uncertainties (e.g., those that arise from noisy sensor measurements, 
communication, or state estimation methods) at every time step. We propose a safety guaranteed hierarchical 
coordination and control scheme called Safe-RMM to address the challenge. Specifically, the high-level 
coordination policy of CAVs in mixed traffic environment is trained by the Robust Multi-Agent Proximal Policy 
Optimization (RMAPPO) method. Though trained without uncertainty, our method leverages a worst-case Q 
network to ensure the model's robust performances when state uncertainties are present during testing. The low-
level controller is implemented using model predictive control (MPC) with robust Control Barrier Functions 
(CBFs) to guarantee safety through their forward invariance property. We compare our method with baselines in 
different road networks in the CARLA simulator. Results show that our method provides the best evaluated safety 
and efficiency in challenging mixed traffic environments with uncertainties. 
17. Key Words
Autonomous driving, reinforcement learning, multi-agent 
system, safe and robust control, simulation 
(http://trt.trb.org) 
18. Distribution Statement
No restrictions.
19. Security Classif. (of this report)
Unclassified
20. Security Classif. (of this page)
Unclassified
21. No. of Pages
10
22. Price
   Form DOT F 1700.7 (8-72) 
  Reproduction of completed page authorized. 

NEW ENGLAND UNIVERSITY TRANSPORTATION CENTER 
Final Report 
1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
About
 
NEUTC
The
 
New
 
England Regional
 
University
 
Transportation Center
 
(NEUTC)
 
is
 
a diverse,
multidisciplinary consortium
 
committed to addressing the
 
pressing issue
 
of
 
traffic
 
safety. Our 
objective, in line
 
with the
 
Infrastructure
 
Investment
 
and Jobs Act
 
(IIJA), is
 
to drive
transformative
 
research,
 
education, and technology transfer
 
to
 
address
 
critical
 
traffic safety
 
needs
in
 
a
 
time when
 
roadway
 
fatalities
 
are
 
distressingly
 
high.
Our
 
research
 
and educational
 
activities
 
at
 
NEUTC
 
are guided
 
by
 
four
 
principal
 
safety
 
themes,
each
 
addressing
 
a
 
critical
 
challenge in
 
transportation
 
safety.
 
These themes
 
capture the various 
integral
 
components
 
of
 
the
 
transportation system,
 
focusing on technology, infrastructure,
vehicles, and users
 
with a
 
commitment
 
to public
 
engagement. Our
 
overarching theme is
 
promoting safety, with
 
the
 
common underlying science
 
being the
 
study of
 
behavioral,
systemic,
 
environmental,
 
and
 
mobility-driven factors
 
on
 
safety.
Disclaimer
The contents of this report reflect the views of the authors, who are responsible for the facts and 
the accuracy of the information presented herein. This document is disseminated in the interest
of information exchange. The report is funded, partially or entirely, under 69A3552348301 from 
the U.S. Department of Transportation’s University Transportation Centers Program. The U.S.
Government assumes no liability for the contents or use thereof.
All matching funds were University salaries and graduate tuition waivers.
Motivation
Machine 
 
learning 
 
models 
 
assisted 
 
by 
 
more 
 
accurate 
 
on-board 
 
sensors, 
 
such 
 
as 
 
camera 
 
and
LiDARs, 
 
have 
 
enabled 
 
intelligent 
 
driving 
 
to 
 
a 
 
certain 
 
degree. 
 
Meanwhile, 
 
advances 
 
in 
 
wireless
communication technologies also make it possible for information sharing beyond an individual's
perception
 
(Martı́n-Sacristán,
 
et 
 
al., 
 
2020; 
 
Mun, 
 
Seo, 
 
& 
 
Lee, 
 
2021). 
 
Through 
 
vehicle-to-
everything
 
(V2X) communications, it has been shown that shared information can contribute to
CAVs
 
decision-making
 
(Buckman, 
 
Pierson, 
 
Karaman, 
 
& 
 
Rus, 
 
2020; 
 
Miller 
 
& 
 
Rim, 
 
2020) 
 
and
improve
 
the safety and coordination of CAVs 
 
(Zhang, Han,
 
Wang, & Miao, 2023). 
 
However, it
remains
 
challenging 
 
for 
 
reinforcement 
 
learning 
 
(RL) 
 
or 
 
multi-agent 
 
reinforcement 
 
learning
(MARL)-based 
 
decision-making
 
methods 
 
to 
 
guarantee 
 
the 
 
safety 
 
of 
 
CAVs 
 
in 
 
complicated
dynamic 
 
environments
 
containing 
 
human 
 
driven 
 
vehicles 
 
(HDVs) 
 
and 
 
optimize 
 
the 
 
joint
behavior 
 
of 
 
the 
 
entire 
 
system.
 
For 
 
real-world 
 
CAVs, 
 
state 
 
uncertainties 
 
from 
 
noisy 
 
sensor
measurements, 
 
state 
 
estimation
 
algorithms 
 
or 
 
the 
 
communication 
 
medium 
 
pose 
 
another
challenge. There can be scenarios where
 
safety is highly correlated
 
with the correctness of state
information,
 
especially 
 
in 
 
the 
 
presence 
 
of
 
HDVs/unconnected 
 
vehicles. 
 
Moreover, 
 
there 
 
is 
 
no
hardware demonstration (small scale or full
 
scale) of MARL for
 
CAVs.
 
The existing literature in
this area generally falls into the following
 
major categories.

 
 
Safe RL and Robust RL: Different approaches have been proposed to guarantee or improve safety 
of the system, such as defining a safety shield or barrier assisting RL or MARL algorithm in either 
training or execution stage (Brunke, et al., 2022; Cai, Cao, Lu, Zhang, & Xiong, 2021), constrained 
RL/MARL that learns a risk network (Wen, Duan, Li, Xu, & Peng, 2020), an expected cost function 
(Lu, Zhang, Chen, Başar, & Horesh, 2021), or cost constraints from language (Wang, Fang, 
Tomilin, Fang, & Du, 2024) that define the safety requirements. For MARL of CAV, safety-
checking module with CBF-PID controller for each individual vehicle has been designed (Wang, 
et al., 2023; Zhang, Han, Wang, & Miao, 2023). However, the above works assume accurate state 
inputs to RL or MARL algorithm from the driving environment and cannot tolerate noisy or 
inaccurate state input. Meanwhile, robust RL and robust MARL that only considers to train a policy 
under state uncertainty or model uncertainty (Liang, Sun, Zheng, & Huang, 2022; Han, Wang, Su, 
Shi, & Miao, 2022; Salvato, Fenu, Medvet, & Pellegrino, 2021; Pinto, Davidson, Sukthankar, & 
Gupta, 2017) without explicitly considering the safety requirements have been proposed recently.  
However, in the multi-agent settings with imperfect observations, considering both safety 
requirements and robustness in a unified decision-making framework for CAVs still remains 
challenging. 
Rule-Based Approaches: Unified optimization framework poses challenges that can be addressed 
by decomposing the problem into hierarchical structures. Specifically, the higher-level control is 
responsible for decision making and the lower-level control is responsible for safe execution. For 
the higher-level planner, heuristic rule-based methods can be employed in which a set of rules 
govern the behavior of each agent within the system. For instance, existing driving behavior 
models in mixed traffic can be found in (Treiber, Hennecke, & Helbing, 2000; Kesting, Treiber, & 
Helbing, 2007; Munigety, 2018). However, these models often lack robustness and make various 
assumptions about HDVs, which prevents generalization to all scenarios. MPC can be used for the 
lower-level controller due to its ability in reference tracking and handling hard constraints in real 
time. In situations where imperfect observations are present, robust MPC approaches may be used, 
such as tube MPC (Lopez, Slotine, & How, 2019; Mayne & Kerrigan, 2007; Sinha, Harrison, 
Richards, & Pavone, 2022). Nevertheless, tube-based MPC approaches require a feedback 
controller that can keep the actual system trajectory close to the nominal one. The calculation of 
such feedback controller is not trivial in multi-agent systems with nonlinear dynamics. Min-Max 
MPC (Raimondo, Limon, Lazar, Magni, & ndez Camacho, 2009) can also be adopted but it is 
often difficult to solve, and when it is approximated, the approximation can result in an overly 
conservative solution. 

 
 
Executive Summary 
Problem summary 
We consider the robust cooperative policy-learning problem under uncertain state inputs for CAVs 
in mixed traffic environments including HDVs that do not communicate or coordinate with CAVs, 
and various driving scenarios such as multi-lane intersection and highway (as shown in below 
Figure 1). We assume that each CAV can get shared information from V2V and V2I 
communications. We consider that a CAV agent 𝑖𝑖 has accurate self-observation of its driving state 
but potentially perturbed observations of the other vehicles. The two parts collectively constitute 
the state 𝑠𝑠𝑖𝑖 in reinforcement learning and used by the MPC controller as inputs to the robust CBFs. 
We will demonstrate the proposed method in both simulator and F1/10th scale CAVs. 
The problem of Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning with State Uncertainty for CAVs is defined 
as a tuple 𝐺𝐺 = (𝑆𝑆, 𝐴𝐴, 𝑃𝑃, 𝑟𝑟𝑖𝑖, 𝑜𝑜෤, 𝐺𝐺, 𝛾𝛾) where 𝐺𝐺 = (𝑁𝑁, 𝐸𝐸) is the communication network of all CAV 
agents. 𝑆𝑆 is the joint state space of all agents. The state space of agent i: 𝑆𝑆𝑖𝑖 = {𝑜𝑜𝑖𝑖, 𝑜𝑜𝑁𝑁𝑖𝑖, 𝑜𝑜𝑁𝑁𝑖𝑖
𝑈𝑈𝑈𝑈} conta 
ins self-observation 𝑜𝑜𝑖𝑖 , observations 𝑜𝑜𝑁𝑁𝑖𝑖= {𝑜𝑜𝑗𝑗|𝑗𝑗∈ 𝑁𝑁𝑖𝑖} being the communicated message shared 
by neighbor connected agents 𝑁𝑁𝑖𝑖 , observations  𝑜𝑜𝑁𝑁𝑖𝑖
𝑈𝑈𝑈𝑈  of unconnected vehicles 𝑁𝑁𝑖𝑖
𝑈𝑈𝑈𝑈  either 
observed by agent 𝑖𝑖  itself or shared by other agents or infrastructures. For example, self-
observation 𝑜𝑜𝑖𝑖 and shared observations 𝑜𝑜𝑁𝑁𝑖𝑖 can contain location, velocity, acceleration and lane-
detection; observations of unconnected vehicles 𝑁𝑁𝑖𝑖
𝑈𝑈𝑈𝑈 can contain location and velocity. 
Methodology Summary and Details We present our proposed safe MARL algorithm, Safe-RMM, 
demonstrated in the below Figure 2 with two major parts: Robust MAPPO (middle brown-and-
blue block) and Robust CBF-based Model Predictive Control (right red block). It is a hierarchical 
decision-making framework design, it is begun by the design of our Robust MARL algorithm and 
followed by the details of the MPC controller using robust CBFs. Our Robust MARL algorithm 
augments MAPPO (Yu, et al., 2022) such that each PPO agent is equipped with a worst-case Q 
network (Liang, Sun, Zheng, & Huang, 2022). The worst-case Q estimates the potential impact of 
state perturbations on the policy's action selection and the resulting expected return. By 
incorporating it into the policy's training objective, we enhance the robustness of the trained policy  
Figure 1: Intersection scenario (top 3) and highway scenario (below 
1) 

 
 
against state perturbations. Consequently, the proposed algorithm improves both the safety and 
efficiency of CAVs under state uncertainties.  
Robust MAPPO: The proposed Robust MARL algorithm, as shown in the Figure 2 above, uses 
centralized training and decentralized execution. We are inspired by the Worst-case-aware Robust 
RL framework (Liang, Sun, Zheng, & Huang, 2022) and designed the robust MAPPO. Each robust 
PPO agent maintains a policy network (“actor”) 𝜋𝜋𝑖𝑖(𝑠𝑠𝑖𝑖), a value network (“critic”) 𝑉𝑉(𝑠𝑠) and the 
second critic 𝑄𝑄𝑖𝑖(𝑠𝑠𝑖𝑖, 𝑎𝑎𝑖𝑖) network approximating the worst-case action values. To learn a safe 
cooperative policy for the CAVs, the MARL interacts with the MPC controller during the training 
rollout process. As the algorithm starts, agent i's policy takes initial state 𝑠𝑠𝑖𝑖 and samples an action 
𝑎𝑎𝑖𝑖; the MPC-controller with robust CBFs given 𝑎𝑎𝑖𝑖 computes a safe control  𝑢𝑢𝑖𝑖 for the vehicle to 
execute. The agent receives 𝑟𝑟𝑖𝑖  and all agents synchronously move to the next time-step by 
observing the new state 𝑠𝑠′ = ∏𝑠𝑠𝑖𝑖
′
𝑖𝑖
. 
Robust Model Predictive Control: We adopt receding horizon control to implement a low-level 
controller for every agent 𝑖𝑖 in the road network. The low-level controller maps the high-level 
plans/actions 𝑎𝑎𝑖𝑖∼𝜋𝜋𝑖𝑖 into primitive actions/control inputs for agent 𝑖𝑖 . Firstly, a path planning 
function is used to map the high-level plans/actions into state and action references. Subsequently 
this information is fed to the MPC controller. To prevent collision between agents, safety 
constraints are incorporated into the controller using CBFs. 
Experiment 
We conduct our experiment in the CARLA Simulator environment (Dosovitskiy, Ros, Codevilla, 
Lopez, & Koltun, 2017), where each vehicle is configured with onboard GPS and IMU sensors 
and a collision sensor that detects the collision with other objects. We show two challenging 
scenarios at Intersection and on Highway, where we spawn multiple CAVs and some HDVs 
randomly (Figure 1). Intersection CAVs pass the intersection and HDVs from opposite sides cross 
the box at the same time. HDVs pose critical safety threats as they could either hit or be hit by a 
CAV from the side when driving fast (≈10 𝑚𝑚/𝑠𝑠). CAVs aim to avoid collision and reach the preset 
destination after passing through the intersection.  
Figure 2 Safe-RMM Algorithm diagram 

 
 
Intersection: Training results in are shown in Figure 3; evaluations in both scenarios are presented 
in Table 1 below. For each entry in both tables, the left integer is the number of collisions happened 
during evaluation (in 50 episodes); the right value is the agents' mean discounted return 
considering only the rewards related to velocity and goal-achievement. We highlight the top 
performance across all methods with the least collisions and the highest efficiency return.  
Highway CAVs are spawned behind HDVs (red) on a multi-lane highway. During training and 
evaluation, HDVs keep in their lanes at random speed from [7 ∼9] 𝑚𝑚/𝑠𝑠 except one random HDV 
simulates a stop and go scenario. CAVs aim to avoid any collision and drive at the speed limit of 
the road to arrive at the destination. We trained three models: our Safe-RMM method, the “non-
robust” Safe-MM that also adopts our framework, and the MCP method adopting MARL-PID 
controller with CBF safety shield (Zhang, Han, Wang, & Miao, 2023). Each model is trained on 
two scenarios respectively for 200 episodes. In evaluation, aside from the three trained models, we 
have “MP”, MARL with PID controller, as an example of learning-based method without safety 
shielding; and we also implemented the benchmark “RULE” adopting a rule-based planner and a 
robust MPC controller. The “RULE” benchmark has been implemented based on the method 
proposed in (Sabouni, Ahmad, Cassandras, & Li, 2023) which introduces a safety-guaranteed rule 
Figure 3 Agents' performances when training in Intersection 
Table 1 Evaluation Results of Safe-RMM compared with Baselines 

 
 
for managing vehicle merging on roadways. This rule ensures safe interactions between vehicles 
arriving from different roads converging at a common point. Methods are evaluated for 50 episodes 
in both scenarios under four uncertainty configurations: None (uncertainty-free), random error 
𝑒𝑒𝑟𝑟𝑟𝑟𝑟𝑟𝑟𝑟, and two targeting errors 𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝑈𝑈 and 𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝑇𝑇.  
Hardware demonstration 
 
Figure 4 Hardware Demonstration of Robust MARL with Safety Guarantees and Communication 
This paper introduces RSR-RSMARL as shown in Figure 4, a novel Robust and Safe MARL 
framework that supports Real-Sim-Real (RSR) policy adaptation for multi-agent systems with 
communication among agents, with both simulation and hardware demonstrations. Deep multi-
agent reinforcement learning (MARL) has been demonstrated effectively in simulations for many 
multi-robot problems. For autonomous vehicles, the development of vehicle-to-vehicle (V2V) 
communication technologies provide opportunities to further enhance safety of the system. 
However, zero-shot transfer of simulator-trained MARL policies to hardware dynamic systems 
remains challenging, and how to leverage communication and shared information for MARL has 
limited demonstrations on hardware. This problem is challenged by discrepancies between 
simulated and physical states, system state and model uncertainties, practical shared information 
design, and the need for safety guarantees in both simulation and hardware. RSR-RSMARL 
leverages state (includes shared state information among agents) and action representations 
considering real system complexities for MARL formulation. The MARL policy is trained with 
robust MARL algorithm to enable zero-shot transfer to hardware considering the sim-to-real gap. 
A safety shield module using Control Barrier Functions (CBFs) provides safety guarantee for each 
individual agent. Experiment results on F1/10th-scale autonomous vehicles with V2V 
communication demonstrate the ability of RSR-RSMARL framework to enhance driving safety 
and coordination across multiple configurations. These findings emphasize the importance of 
jointly designing robust policy representations and modular safety architectures to enable scalable, 
generalizable RSR transfer in multi-agent autonomy. 

 
 
Outcomes 
This project focuses on designing a 5G-enabled safe and robust deep multi-agent reinforcement 
learning (MARL) framework for CAV coordination, to prove rigorous safety guarantees and the 
benefit of V2X communication in improving system safety and efficiency. The novelty of the 
achievement of the result spans fundamental theory and algorithm principles, model designs, and 
validation methodologies that will emerge to form a new integrated framework for communication, 
machine learning, and control of future safe AVs. In particular, the novel contributions of this 
proposal are as follows. (1) Given enhanced observation capability by 5G-based V2X 
communication, we design a safe multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) framework with a 
computationally tractable algorithm. It makes operation decisions that rigorously guarantee safety 
of AVs according to the requirements, and robust to various types of driving scenarios. (2) Based 
on the quantitative communication requirements from MARL, we develop an effective real-time 
flow scheduling framework for 5G-based V2X communications, featuring per-flow real-time 
schedulability guarantee through time-frequency-space resource allocation to provide desired 
communication quality for safety-critical decision-making and control functions on AVs. (3) We 
validate the proposed approach using simulators, small-scale testbeds such as F1/10th vehicles. 
Papers that already published and submitted for this project: 
1. Zhili Zhang, H M Sabbir Ahmad, Ehsan Sabouni, Yanchao Sun, Furong Huang, Wenchao Li, 
and Fei Miao, “Safety Guaranteed Robust Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning with 
Hierarchical Control for Connected and Automated Vehicles”, ICRA 2025, Internation 
Conference on Robotics and Automation, https://arxiv.org/abs/2309.11057, May 2025. 
2. Keshawn Smith, Zhili Zhang, H M Sabbir Ahmad, Ehsan Sabouni, Maniak Mondal, Song Han, 
Wenchao Li, and Fei Miao, “Robust and Safe Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning 
Framework 
with 
Communication 
for 
Autonomous 
Vehicles”, 
under 
review, 
https://arxiv.org/abs/2506.00982, June 2025. 
 
Impacts 
This project has great potential for technology commercialization and will lead to significant 
societal impact to improve the safety of CAVs. The PIs take the following steps to pursue 
technology transfer. We demonstrate the success of the proposed methodology to CTSRC/CTI 
leadership team, in the future we hope to also demonstrate the hardware performance to CT DOT 
representatives using the small-scale CAV testbed mentioned above. Based on the received 
feedback, the research team will refine the methodology framework and deploy them on the 
electric autonomous buses on UConn Depot campus. The hardware demonstrations have also been 
shown for many K-12 outreach activities at UConn. The PIs work with Verizon to incorporate the 
proposed real-time 5G resource management solution in their 5G base stations install the enhanced 
5G modules on the small-scale autonomous vehicles. The PIs work with Nvidia and Qualcomm to 
practical autonomous driving scenarios. In the future, the PIs will work with the CTSRC/CTI 
leadership, to plan demonstration of the developed technologies on full-scale CAVs testbed if 
possible, to representatives from different DOTs in New England area, government officials, and 
AV manufacturers to explore commercialization opportunities.  

 
 
 
References 
Brunke, L., Greeff, M., Hall, A. W., Yuan, Z., Zhou, S., Panerati, J., & Schoellig, A. P. (2022). 
Safe learning in robotics: From learning-based control to safe reinforcement learning. 
Annual Review of Control, Robotics, and Autonomous Systems, 5, 411–444. 
Buckman, N., Pierson, A., Karaman, S., & Rus, D. (2020). Generating Visibility-Aware 
Trajectories for Cooperative and Proactive Motion Planning. 3220–3226. 
Cai, Z., Cao, H., Lu, W., Zhang, L., & Xiong, H. (2021). Safe Multi-Agent Reinforcement 
Learning through Decentralized Multiple Control Barrier Functions. Safe Multi-Agent 
Reinforcement Learning through Decentralized Multiple Control Barrier Functions. 
Dosovitskiy, A., Ros, G., Codevilla, F., Lopez, A., & Koltun, V. (2017). CARLA: An Open 
Urban Driving Simulator. 1–16. 
Han, S., Wang, H., Su, S., Shi, Y., & Miao, F. (2022). Stable and Efficient Shapley Value-Based 
Reward Reallocation for Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning of Autonomous Vehicles. 
8765–8771. 
Kesting, A., Treiber, M., & Helbing, D. (2007). General Lane-Changing Model MOBIL for Car-
Following Models. Transportation Research Record, 1999, 86-94. doi:10.3141/1999-10 
Liang, Y., Sun, Y., Zheng, R., & Huang, F. (2022). Efficient adversarial training without 
attacking: Worst-case-aware robust reinforcement learning. Advances in Neural 
Information Processing Systems, 35, 22547–22561. 
Lopez, B. T., Slotine, J.-J. E., & How, J. P. (2019). Dynamic tube MPC for nonlinear systems. 
2019 American Control Conference (ACC), (pp. 1655–1662). 
Lu, S., Zhang, K., Chen, T., Başar, T., & Horesh, L. (2021). Decentralized policy gradient 
descent ascent for safe multi-agent reinforcement learning. 35, 8767–8775. 
Martı́n-Sacristán, D., Roger, S., Garcia-Roger, D., Monserrat, J. F., Spapis, P., Zhou, C., & 
Kaloxylos, A. (2020). Low-Latency Infrastructure-Based Cellular V2V Communications 
for Multi-Operator Environments With Regional Split. IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., 
22, 1052–1067. 
Mayne, D. Q., & Kerrigan, E. C. (2007). TUBE-BASED ROBUST NONLINEAR MODEL 
PREDICTIVE CONTROL. IFAC Proceedings Volumes, 40, 36-41. 
doi:https://doi.org/10.3182/20070822-3-ZA-2920.00006 
Miller, A., & Rim, K. (2020). Cooperative Perception and Localization for Cooperative Driving. 
1256–1262. 

 
 
Mun, H., Seo, M., & Lee, D. H. (2021). Secure Privacy-Preserving V2V Communication in 5G-
V2X Supporting Network Slicing. IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst.  
Munigety, C. R. (2018). Modelling behavioural interactions of drivers' in mixed traffic 
conditions. Journal of Traffic and Transportation Engineering (English Edition), 5, 284-
295. 
Pinto, L., Davidson, J., Sukthankar, R., & Gupta, A. (2017). Robust Adversarial Reinforcement 
Learning. In D. Precup, & Y. W. Teh (Ed.), Proceedings of the 34th International 
Conference on Machine Learning. 70, pp. 2817–2826. PMLR. Retrieved from 
https://proceedings.mlr.press/v70/pinto17a.html 
Raimondo, D. M., Limon, D., Lazar, M., Magni, L., & ndez Camacho, E. F. (2009). Min-max 
Model Predictive Control of Nonlinear Systems: A Unifying Overview on Stability. 
European Journal of Control, 15, 5-21. doi:https://doi.org/10.3166/ejc.15.5-21 
Sabouni, E., Ahmad, H. M., Cassandras, C. G., & Li, W. (2023). Merging Control in Mixed 
Traffic with Safety Guarantees: A Safe Sequencing Policy with Optimal Motion Control. 
2023 IEEE 26th International Conference on Intelligent Transportation Systems (ITSC), 
(pp. 4260-4265). doi:10.1109/ITSC57777.2023.10422265 
Salvato, E., Fenu, G., Medvet, E., & Pellegrino, F. A. (2021). Crossing the reality gap: A survey 
on sim-to-real transferability of robot controllers in reinforcement learning. IEEE Access, 
9, 153171–153187. 
Sinha, R., Harrison, J., Richards, S. M., & Pavone, M. (2022). Adaptive Robust Model Predictive 
Control with Matched and Unmatched Uncertainty. American Control Conference. 
Retrieved from https://arxiv.org/abs/2104.08261 
Treiber, M., Hennecke, A., & Helbing, D. (2000, February). Congested Traffic States in 
Empirical Observations and Microscopic Simulations. Physical Review E, 62, 1805-1824. 
doi:10.1103/PhysRevE.62.1805 
Wang, J., Yang, S., An, Z., Han, S., Zhang, Z., Mangharam, R., . . . Miao, F. (2023). Multi-Agent 
Reinforcement Learning Guided by Signal Temporal Logic Specifications. arXiv preprint 
arXiv:2306.06808. 
Wang, Z., Fang, M., Tomilin, T., Fang, F., & Du, Y. (2024). Safe Multi-agent Reinforcement 
Learning with Natural Language Constraints. Safe Multi-agent Reinforcement Learning 
with Natural Language Constraints. Retrieved from https://arxiv.org/abs/2405.20018 
Wen, L., Duan, J., Li, S. E., Xu, S., & Peng, H. (2020). Safe reinforcement learning for 
autonomous vehicles through parallel constrained policy optimization. 1–7. 
Yu, C., Velu, A., Vinitsky, E., Gao, J., Wang, Y., Bayen, A., & Wu, Y. (2022). The surprising 
effectiveness of ppo in cooperative multi-agent games. Advances in Neural Information 
Processing Systems, 35, 24611–24624. 

 
 
Zhang, Z., Han, S., Wang, J., & Miao, F. (2023). Spatial-temporal-aware safe multi-agent 
reinforcement learning of connected autonomous vehicles in challenging scenarios. 
5574–5580. 
 
 
