Transferring Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning Policies for
Autonomous Driving using Sim-to-Real
Eduardo Candela*1, Leandro Parada*1, Luis Marques*1,
Tiberiu-Andrei Georgescu1, Yiannis Demiris2, Panagiotis Angeloudis1
Abstract— Autonomous Driving requires high levels of co-
ordination and collaboration between agents. Achieving ef-
fective coordination in multi-agent systems is a difficult task
that remains largely unresolved. Multi-Agent Reinforcement
Learning has arisen as a powerful method to accomplish
this task because it considers the interaction between agents
and also allows for decentralized training—which makes it
highly scalable. However, transferring policies from simulation
to the real world is a big challenge, even for single-agent
applications. Multi-agent systems add additional complexities to
the Sim-to-Real gap due to agent collaboration and environment
synchronization. In this paper, we propose a method to transfer
multi-agent autonomous driving policies to the real world. For
this, we create a multi-agent environment that imitates the
dynamics of the Duckietown multi-robot testbed, and train
multi-agent policies using the MAPPO algorithm with different
levels of domain randomization. We then transfer the trained
policies to the Duckietown testbed and show that when using
our method, domain randomization can reduce the reality gap
by 90%. Moreover, we show that different levels of parameter
randomization have a substantial impact on the Sim-to-Real
gap. Finally, our approach achieves significantly better results
than a rule-based benchmark.
I. INTRODUCTION
Coordination of Autonomous Vehicles (AVs) in traffic is
a hard problem with a non-trivial optimization objective. On
the one hand, rule-based policies can provide acceptable
solutions to specific and heavily-simplified situations, but
cannot possibly cover all scenarios that can happen in the real
world [1], and require manual crafting of the rules. Moreover,
rule-based methods cannot achieve effective coordination be-
tween agents and cannot adapt to changing environments. On
the other hand, multi-agent learning algorithms can achieve
effective agent-agent coordination and can potentially ex-
plore a great number of different environment configurations.
Multi-Agent Deep Reinforcement Learning (MARL) is a
powerful scalable framework for developing control policies
for AVs. MARL uses Deep Neural Networks to represent
complex value functions or agents policies that would oth-
erwise require specific hand-crafted rules. However, MARL
cannot be trained in live Autonomous Driving systems due
to safety concerns [2], [3] . These algorithms must be trained
using thousands or even millions of steps, which cannot be
*These authors contributed equally.
1E. Candela, L. Parada, L. Marques, T. Georgescu and P. An-
geloudis are with the Centre for Transport Studies, Department of
Civil and Environmental Engineering, Imperial College London, UK
e.candela-garza19@imperial.ac.uk
2Y. Demiris is with the Personal Robotics Laboratory, Department of
Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Imperial College London, UK
Fig. 1.
The goal is to train autonomous vehicles to go around a track as
fast as possible while avoiding collisions, parked obstacles, and leaving the
track. Policies are trained using Multi-Agent Deep Reinforcement Learning
in a simulated environment with a kinematic model and different levels of
domain randomization that reduce the sim-to-real gap by adding noise and
uncertainty to the simulations. The trained policies are then transferred to
a real fleet of Duckiebot robots, with a motion capture camera system that
obtains the vehicles’ real pose.
achieved in the real world. Therefore, MARL algorithms
must be trained in simulation environments, and then the
policies can be transferred to the real system.
Simulations have been an essential tool in the field of
reinforcement learning, providing a flexible environment
to train and test new algorithmic developments efficiently.
However, the performance of policies trained in simulation
is not likely to be replicated in the real world. The difference
between a simulated environment and its real counterpart is
called reality gap [4], and is usually observed through the
overfitting of the learned policy to the unique characteristics
of the simulations.
Several approaches have been proposed for bridging the
reality gap in single-agent tasks, particularly in robotic
manipulation [5], [6]. Among others, the methods include
System Identification [7], Domain Randomisation [8] and
Domain Adaptation [9]. Despite the increasing efforts in this
direction, bridging the reality gap in single-agent applica-
2022 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS)
October 23-27, 2022, Kyoto, Japan
978-1-6654-7927-1/22/$31.00 ©2022 IEEE
8814
2022 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS) | 978-1-6654-7927-1/22/$31.00 ©2022 IEEE | DOI: 10.1109/IROS47612.2022.9981319
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Texas at Arlington. Downloaded on June 27,2026 at 06:10:30 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

tions remains to be a challenging task.
The reality gap can become even larger for multi-agent
systems, such as those involving AVs. These systems in-
troduce additional complexities to the Sim-to-Real problem,
such as agent collaboration, environment synchronization
and limited agent perception. Little work has been done on
bridging the gap between simulation and reality in multi-AV
systems. Attempts have been made to make MARL more
robust to uncertainty [10], [11], although these methods have
not been tested in the real world.
Therefore, we develop a method to train multi-AV driving
policies in simulation and effectively transfer them to reality.
For this purpose, we present a multi-agent autonomous
driving gym environment that resembles the Duckietown
testbed [12], which consists of small differential drive robots
with two conventional wheels and a passive caster wheel. We
then train different multi-agent policies in simulation using
MARL and domain randomization [4], and then transfer
them to real life miniature autonomous vehicles. We compare
the method against a traditional rule-based method on a case
study with 3 agents and 3 stationary vehicles, which act
as obstacles, and show the benefit of training policies with
domain randomization when transferring them to reality.
To the best of our knowledge, this is the first study using
MARL and domain randomization for training real-life AV
controllers. The contributions of this paper are:
• The development of a method to train AV controllers
(policies) in multi-agent scenarios using MARL.
• Using domain randomization on a set of proposed
parameters when training the AV controllers. This leads
to reducing the reality gap between simulation and real-
life performance.
• Deploying the trained controllers on a fleet of Duck-
iebots (small car robots), and analyzing their perfor-
mance with a motion capture camera system.
The rest of this paper is structured as follows. Section
II presents the background and related work. Section III
proposes the methodology including the MARL modeling
framework, the Duckietown testbed, the gym environment
and the Sim-to-Real transfer mechanism. Section IV presents
the main results and Section V concludes with insights to
future work.
II. RELATED WORK
A. Multi-Agent Learning for Autonomous Vehicles
A taxonomy for multi-agent learning in Autonomous Driv-
ing was presented in [3], consisting of five levels. The first
level M0 represents rule-based planning with no learning,
and the last level M5 represents agents with a high degree of
forward-planning, working to optimize the Price of Anarchy
of the overall traffic scenario [13], [14]. Most multi-agent
learning paradigms find it difficult to reach level M5, as most
traffic scenarios are massive multi-agent games. Fortunately,
a significant amount of algorithms fit either in M3, allowing
agents to behave and expect in return partially cooperative
behavior [15], and M4, where a local Nash equilibrium is
achieved through the grouping of agents [16].
A few studies have addressed multi-AV problems using
MARL. [3] proposed an open-source MARL simulation
platform, that includes several traffic scenarios with the
possibility of choosing different AV controllers, environment
configurations and MARL algorithms. Similarly, [2] pre-
sented MACAD-gym, an Autonomous Driving multi-agent
platform based on the CARLA [17] simulator. [18] modeled
the multi-agent problem as a graph and used Graph Neural
Networks in combination with Deep Q Network to control
lane-changing decisions in environments with multiple Con-
nected Autonomous Vehicles (CAVs).
B. Sim-to-Real
To bridge the gap between simulation and reality, known
as reality gap, various domain-adaptation approaches have
been developed [5]. To this date, the area with the highest
amount of contributions in Sim-to-real is robotic manipu-
lation. The methods that have been used include imitation
learning, data augmentation and real world reinforcement
learning. The latter case is the most difficult one to replicate
due to lack of resources, safety concerns and difficulty in
resetting training runs. There are simple ways of automat-
ing the reset in real world robotic manipulation [6], or
to continue training efficiently without resetting [19], [20].
However, in the case of AVs, human interference is needed
in order to reset the environment or to prevent catastrophic
events. Therefore, most of the techniques used in robotic
manipulation cannot be adapted to environments with AVs.
For AV scenarios, [21] proposed ModEL, a modular
infrastructure which considered perception, planning and
control, each being trained using reinforcement learning.
They used vision as the agent’s main sensorial perception,
and the CARLA simulator [17] during training for data
augmentation and domain generalization, in order to improve
overall agent robustness.
Furthermore, in the case of multi-agent systems, there
are more reality gaps compared to single-agent settings.
Three significant gaps have been reported in [10]: the control
architecture gap, which relates to the tendency of simulators
to synchronize the actions of all agents at each time step; the
observation gap, which relates to the limited perception of
agents in scaled-out environments; and the communication
gap which, similar to the previous one, relates to the highly
limited and inconsistent communication which in multi-agent
systems. Given traditional methods of software simulation,
the aforementioned gaps are non-trivial to overcome, even
with a redesign of the simulation itself. The study suggests
that more robust modeling of the interaction between agents
would be more beneficial. [10] proposed a method called
Agent Decentralized Organization (ADO), which encourages
agents to share a board of information provided at certain
time frames, without the necessity for the information to be
complete or up to date.
Although research in Sim-to-Real for AV learning is exten-
sive, the main focus of the literature is generalizability over
diverse environments, not different actors. This can make
progress in the literature slower, since the hardware is usually
8815
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Texas at Arlington. Downloaded on June 27,2026 at 06:10:30 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

significantly different and not open source. Thankfully, there
are attempts to standardize the research hardware, with open
source sets like Duckietown [12] and DeepRacer [22], which
ensure that more prior research becomes easier to reproduce
consistently. However, no study has focused on transferring
multi-agent policies for autonomous driving to the real world.
III. METHODOLOGY
After briefly reviewing MARL and MAPPO, we will
describe the physical setup used for validation, introduce the
simulated environment used for policy training and present
sources of error that lead to the reality gap and how these
were addressed.
A. Multi-Agent Deep Reinforcement Learning
The MARL problem can be modeled as a Decentralized
Partially Observable MDP (Dec-POMDP), which can be
defined by the tuple ⟨N, S, Ai, T, R, Ωi, O⟩, where N is a
finite set of agents, S is the set of states, Ai is the set of
actions for agent i, T : S ×A →S is the transition function,
R : S × A × S →ℜis the reward function, Ωi is the
set of observations for agent i and O : S × A is the set
of observation probabilities. The goal of Dec-POMPD is to
find the joint optimal policy π∗that maximizes the expected
return.
B. Multi-Agent Proximal Policy Optimization (MAPPO):
MAPPO [23] is an extension of the Proximal Policy
Optimization algorithm to the multi-agent setting. As an on-
policy method, it can be less sample efficient than off-policy
methods such as MADDPG [24] and QMIX [25]. Despite
this fact, MAPPO has been found to be a strong method for
cooperative environments, outperforming state-of-the-art off-
policy methods and achieving similar sample efficiency in
practice. In addition, knowledge of prior states gets recalled
through the usage of recurrent neural networks (RNNs) for
the actor and critic networks.
The architecture of MAPPO consists of two separate
networks: an actor and a critic network. The actor network
uses the observation of each agent, while the critic network
observes the whole global state. Therefore, it is directly
related to the Centralized Training Decentralized Execution
(CTDE) paradigm. The centralized critic can foster coop-
eration among agents during training, but during execution
agents’ policies (actors) are implemented in a decentralized
way. We assume that all agents share both networks for sim-
plicity, even though MAPPO allows for different networks
for each individual agent.
C. Duckietown testbed
Duckietown [12] is a multi-robot testbed that consists
of several small autonomous robots (Duckiebots) [26] that
transit inside a city (Duckietown). Each Duckiebot is a
differential drive vehicle equipped with wheel encoders, a
monocular camera, an Inertial Measurement Unit (IMU) and
a time of flight sensor.
For positioning, we use a NaturalPoint OptiTrack MoCap
system to obtain the real-time pose of the Duckiebots. A
unique asymmetric passive marker configuration is used for
each car, and the system was calibrated to be accurate up
to 0.5 mm. The 3D pose of each car is broadcasted to the
simulator through the NatNet SDK, such that position (x, y)
and orientation (θ) are directly obtained after a coordinate
transformation, and velocities are calculated from applying
finite differences to consecutive measurements.
D. Duckietown Multi-Agent Autonomous Driving Environ-
ment (Duckie-MAAD)
For the purpose of training and evaluating multi-AV poli-
cies, we introduce a new environment called Duckietown
Multi-Agent Autonomous Driving Environment (Duckie-
MAAD), which is based on the Gym-Duckietown envi-
ronment [27]. The original Gym-Duckietown is a single-
agent lane-following environment that can be used to test
different Reinforcement Learning methods. We extend this
environment to the multi-agent setting and allow agents to
take high-level decisions based on local observations. The
agents (Duckiebots) can move around a track, following
predefined lane paths and taking decisions to accelerate,
brake, or change lanes. In addition, each agent can perceive
nearby agents and objects in the track within a given radius.
Based on perception, proximity and collision penalties can be
assigned to agents, as well as a penalty for leaving the track.
Although the agents follow a path predefined by waypoints,
they have to learn to stay inside the track, because going
too fast will take them off. Figure 2 shows a test track
with 3 agents (the moving cars) for the Duckie-MAAD
environment.
Upon a new environment step, the MAPPO algorithm
takes in the observations of the agents and outputs a high-
level action A for each car. Using this as input, a Path
Following logic is implemented that determines for each
car its next goal waypoint (within a pre-defined list that
extends along each lane), and calculates the required linear
and angular velocities (v, ω) to reach it. These are passed
to the differential drive Inverse Kinematics models which
produces the left and right wheel velocities (Vl, Vr) that
lead to this motion. Said velocities are then either fed to the
simulated vehicles, where the pose is updated via a Non-
linear Dynamics model [28]; or to the real cars, where the
pose is then updated via the OptiTrack MoCap system. The
new robot poses are then used to calculate the Reward R and
the end of the step is reached. A detailed diagram illustrating
this step update can be found in Figure 3.
We define the individual elements of the Duckietown
Multi-Agent Autonomous Driving Environment as follows:
• Agents N: Each Duckiebot is treated as an individual
agent. All agents are independent, have a local obser-
vation of the environment and obtain a unique reward.
• Observation Ω: The local observation of each Duckiebot
is composed by the steering angle, the distance to the
center of the lane, the angle with respect to a tangent
to the current lane, local distances to the closest Duck-
iebots in the same and opposite lane, their respective
8816
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Texas at Arlington. Downloaded on June 27,2026 at 06:10:30 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

Robot Position 
Goal Point
Robot Direction 
Direction to Goal Point
Steering Angle
Fig. 2.
Test track, used in sim and reality, for the Duckie-MAAD gym
environment. Yellow circles represent the waypoints along each lane, which
extend all the way around the loop. The goal point is determined by the
Path Following function and the steering angle required to reach it is the
difference between the car’s direction in world coordinates and the angle
between the car’s position and the goal point.
longitudinal velocities, and a binary variable that shows
whether the agent is off the track or not.
• Action A: A discrete action space with four high-
level possible decisions – accelerate (0.25 m/s2); brake
(0.25 m/s2); change lane; keep previous velocity (no
acceleration). In each step agents can accelerate, brake,
change lane or do nothing.
• Reward function R: v −5c −5t −0.5l; where v is the
agent’s measure velocity (m/s), and binary variables c
representing a collision, t capturing if the agent is out
of the track, and l if the agent is changing lanes.
E. Simulation to reality transfer
There is a significant gap between the simulation envi-
ronment and reality due to several reasons. First, the agent
dynamics within the Duckie-MAAD gym environment are
based on a dynamical model, which is based on various
assumptions, such as a symmetrical mass distribution of
the Duckiebots and that the motors operate in steady-state
mode. Second, in the simulator, agent steps are performed
sequentially according to the environment’s internal clock,
meanwhile in reality the agents may take their own step
asynchronously. Third, there are certain inaccuracies related
Linear
Inverse
Kinematics
Path
Following 
Domain
Randomization
Non-linear
Dynamics
MAPPO
Real car
OptiTrack
Model
Mismatch &
Disturbances
Measurement
Noise
Real Environment
High Level
Action
Obs 
Simulated Environment
Policy
Update
Step
Fig. 3.
Duckie-MAAD architecture. The step update loop is the following:
1) the agent takes an action following policy π; 2) using this, the Path
Following function selects the next target waypoint and calculates the linear
and angular velocities required to reach it; 3) the wheel velocities that
lead to such speeds are calculated using (linear) differential drive Inverse
Kinematics and sent to the agents (and domain randomization is added if
training MARL); 4) the resulting pose for each agent is obtained either from
real life or in the simulator, together with a reward R; If training MARL,
5) the policy is updated using MAPPO. The green elements, only when
training MARL.
to the OptiTrack positioning system. Fourth, although all the
Duckiebots share the same architecture, in practice they all
behave differently due to small differences in their individual
components. All of the above create a significant Sim-to-
Real gap that must be addressed in order to successfully
implement multi-agent policies trained in simulation.
To tackle this gap, we use domain randomization, which
is a technique that consists in training a DRL model over
a variety of simulated environments with randomized pa-
rameters. The objective is to train a model that can adapt
to the real world environment, which is expected to be a
sample of the space of environments created through the
randomization procedure. The parameters of the Inverse
Kinematics Model that showed the most variance among
the physical cars were K, gain, and trim. Moreover, there
was a high error in the observed steering angle during initial
testing. Therefore, these were the parameters we chose for
domain randomization within the Duckie-MAAD training
RL environment:
• Steering factor (unitless)
• Motor constant (K) (Nm/
√
W)
• Gain (unitless)
• Trim (unitless)
• Steering error (rad)
IV. RESULTS
A. Setup
To implement and validate the proposed methodology,
we made use of the Duckietown Multi-Agent Autonomous
Driving Environment for first training and then testing in
8817
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Texas at Arlington. Downloaded on June 27,2026 at 06:10:30 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

simulation various policies. Afterward, experiments in real
life were conducted following the same goals, rewards and
settings. The specific environment utilized consisted of 3
agents and 3 permanently parked cars randomly spawned
at the beginning of each episode throughout the test track
shown in Figure 2. Agents had the goal to maximize their
reward by going around the track as fast as possible while
avoiding leaving the bounds of the track and colliding
with other cars (either parked or other moving agents). A
minimum speed of 0.1 m/s was set for all agents; and a
maximum speed of 0.3, 0.4 and 0.5 m/s for each agent,
respectively. Both the simulations and real experiments were
run at discrete time-steps with a frame rate of 10 Hz. The 8
PrimeX13 cameras of the MoCap setup captured at 120 Hz,
providing more than sufficient temporal resolution.
We trained three policies using the MAPPO RL method
with the following parameters:
• N° episodes for training: 2000
• N° steps per episode: 400
• Learning Rate: 5 × 10−4
• Critic Learning Rate: 5 × 10−4
• PPO epochs: 15
• Entropy coefficient: 0.01
• Actor Network: MLP(64, 64, 4)
• Critic Network: MLP(64, 64, 1)
Each policy was trained using a different level of domain
randomization (none, medium, high) with the distributions
shown in Table I – Normal N(µ, σ), or Uniform U(a, b).
For training, a workstation was used with an AMD Ryzen
Threadripper 3990x 64-core processor and a NVIDIA RTX
3090 GPU, which resulted in a training time of approxi-
mately 3 hours for each policy.
TABLE I
DOMAIN RANDOMIZATION DISTRIBUTIONS
Policy
Rule-based
No D.R.
Med D.R.
High D.R.
Steer factor
1
1
U(0.8,1.2)
U(0.5,1.5)
K
27
27
U(22,32)
U(14,40)
Gain
1
1
U(0.8,1.2)
U(0.5,1.5)
Trim
0
0
U(-0.1,0.1)
U(-0.15,0.15)
Steer error
0
0
N(0,0.1)
N(0,0.5)
As a baseline, we implemented Gipps’ lane changing
model [29] – which is a commonly used rule-based algorithm
for describing driving behavior – and set the safe following
distances according to the RSS model introduced in [30].
The four policies were tested first in the simulated envi-
ronment and then in the Duckietown testbed (real life) to
measure and compare their performance and transferability
to real life. To achieve statistical significance, and reduce the
variance of the results, 30 runs were executed in the simulator
and then another 30 in real life for each policy, with all cars
being randomly spawned at the beginning of each run. Each
run lasted 400 steps, granting enough time to the agents to
go around the track at least once.
B. Analysis
The first step was to train the four policies in the simulator.
All converged after approximately 500 episodes, as can be
seen in the reward plot in Figure 4.
Fig. 4.
Reward convergence during training of Med D.R. policy.
The average rewards achieved by each policy in the
simulated environment and real life are presented in Figure
5; the averages were computed over all scenarios and cars.
It can be seen that policies clearly perform worse in reality
than in the simulator. This is due to the previously discussed
reality gap, which in this case is significant mainly because
of the high unreliability of the Duckiebot robots. If the
simulated environment perfectly captured the real world,
then the difference between simulated and real-life reward
would be negligible, and no domain randomization would
be required. Thus, the reality gap was measured as the
difference between the reward achieved by a policy trained in
the simulator with no domain randomization, and the reward
obtained by applying that same policy in real life.
Fig. 5.
Average rewards (over scenarios and cars) for policies in simulation
and real life. MARL policies clearly outperform the rule-based baseline both
in the simulator and real life. The policy with medium domain randomization
bridges the reality gap the best, as it reduces the gap by almost 90%.
The rule-based policy performed the worst, as was ex-
pected, because despite following safety distances, it cannot
adapt to other agents not precisely following their lanes. The
policy trained with MARL and no domain randomization
achieved the best rewards in simulation, but the worst in
8818
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Texas at Arlington. Downloaded on June 27,2026 at 06:10:30 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

real life among the MARL-trained policies. Note that, despite
slightly decreasing the simulated performance, the addition
of domain randomization improves the rewards in real life.
The policy with a medium level of domain randomization
performed better than the one with a high level, because
the latter learned to be more conservative, as can be ap-
preciated in the following figures. The poor performance of
the untrained rule-based algorithm can be used as a proxy
of the reality gap caused mainly by the unreliability and
unpredictability of the real Duckiebots.
To better understand the resulting rewards of the policies,
we analyze the four aspects that compose the reward func-
tion: speed, staying within the designated track, collisions,
and lane changes. The numerical results of both the simula-
tion and real tests are presented in Figures 6 and 7.
Fig. 6.
Distribution of performance metrics across different policies: 1)
measured speed; 2) number of times a vehicle left the track.
INTERPRETATION: The rule-based method tends to present the highest
speed and track violations; closely followed by the MARL policy with no
D.R. The policy obtained with medium D.R. (right-hand side policy) is
the best one, followed by the one with high D.R. which tends to be more
conservative in terms of speed – leading to the least number of track exits,
especially in real life.
The average speed is the highest for the rule-based policy,
closely followed by the med D.R. one. The policy with
the slowest average measured speed is the one with high
D.R. – confirming that this is the most conservative policy,
especially in real life. Similarly, for the times an agent
goes outside the track bounds, the rule-based presents the
highest number and the high D.R. the lowest; notice that
this phenomenon happens mainly in real life and not in the
simulated environment. For collisions, note that for all three
MARL policies there are virtually no collisions in simulation,
and that the policies trained with domain randomization tend
to have lower collisions compared to the other policies.
Finally, the average number of times an agent changes lanes
Fig. 7.
Distribution of performance metrics across different policies: 1)
number of collisions; 2) number of lane changes.
INTERPRETATION: In general, the policies trained with D.R. perform
better in real life, partly because they change lanes significantly more times
(compared to simulation) to avoid hazardous situations. The medium D.R.
policy achieves the least amount of collisions in real-life.
is significantly larger in real life compared to simulation for
policies trained with domain randomization, which can be
interpreted as the agents choosing to switch lanes more to
avoid the potential crashes that happen in real life.
V. CONCLUSIONS
AVs will lead to enormous safety and efficiency benefits
across multiple fields, once the complex problem of multi-
agent coordination and collaboration is solved. MARL can
help towards this, as it enables agents to learn to collaborate
by sharing observations and rewards. However, the successful
application of MARL, is heavily dependent on the fidelity
of the simulation environment they were trained in.
We present a method to train policies using MARL and
to reduce the reality gap when transferring them to the
real world via adding domain randomization during training,
which we show has a significant and positive impact in
real performance compared to rule-based methods or policies
trained without different levels of domain randomization.
It is important to mention that despite the performance
improvements observed when using domain randomization,
its use presents diminishing returns as seen with the overly
conservative policy, for it cannot completely close the reality
gap without increasing the fidelity of the simulator. Addi-
tionally, the amount of domain randomization to be used
is case-specific and a theory for the selection of domain
randomization remains an open question. The quantification
and description of reality gaps presents another opportunity
for future research.
8819
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Texas at Arlington. Downloaded on June 27,2026 at 06:10:30 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This research was partially supported by the President’s
Scholarship Programme funded by Imperial College London,
and the Chilean National Agency for Research and Devel-
opment (ANID) through the ”BECAS DOCTORADO EN
EXTRANJERO” program, Grant No. 72210279.
REFERENCES
[1] J. Stewart. (2018) Humans just can’t stop rear-ending self-driving
cars—let’s figure out why. [Online]. Available: https://bit.ly/3M2JED8
[2] P. Palanisamy, “Multi-agent connected autonomous driving using deep
reinforcement learning,” in 2020 International Joint Conference on
Neural Networks (IJCNN).
IEEE, 2020, pp. 1–7.
[3] M. Zhou, J. Luo, J. Villella, Y. Yang, D. Rusu, J. Miao, W. Zhang,
M. Alban, I. Fadakar, Z. Chen et al., “Smarts: Scalable multi-agent
reinforcement learning training school for autonomous driving,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2010.09776, 2020.
[4] J. Tobin, R. Fong, A. Ray, J. Schneider, W. Zaremba, and P. Abbeel,
“Domain randomization for transferring deep neural networks from
simulation to the real world,” CoRR, vol. abs/1703.06907, 2017.
[Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/1703.06907
[5] W. Zhao, J. P. Queralta, and T. Westerlund, “Sim-to-real transfer in
deep reinforcement learning for robotics: a survey,” in 2020 IEEE
Symposium Series on Computational Intelligence (SSCI). IEEE, 2020,
pp. 737–744.
[6] B. Eysenbach, S. Gu, J. Ibarz, and S. Levine, “Leave no trace:
Learning to reset for safe and autonomous reinforcement learning,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:1711.06782, 2017.
[7] M.
Kaspar,
J.
D.
M.
Osorio,
and
J.
Bock,
“Sim2Real
Transfer
for
Reinforcement
Learning
without
Dynamics
Randomization,”
Feb.
2020,
arXiv:2002.11635
[cs].
[Online].
Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/2002.11635
[8] J.
Matas,
S.
James,
and
A.
J.
Davison,
“Sim-to-Real
Reinforcement
Learning
for
Deformable
Object
Manipulation,”
Oct.
2018,
arXiv:1806.07851
[cs].
[Online].
Available:
http://arxiv.org/abs/1806.07851
[9] H. F. Bassani, R. A. Delgado, J. N. d. O. L. Junior, H. R.
Medeiros, P. H. M. Braga, and A. Tapp, “Learning to Play Soccer
by Reinforcement and Applying Sim-to-Real to Compete in the Real
World,” Mar. 2020, arXiv:2003.11102 [cs, stat]. [Online]. Available:
http://arxiv.org/abs/2003.11102
[10] Y.-H. Suh, S.-P. Woo, H. Kim, and D.-H. Park, “A sim2real framework
enabling decentralized agents to execute maddpg tasks,” in Proceed-
ings of the Workshop on Distributed Infrastructures for Deep Learning,
2019, pp. 1–6.
[11] K. Zhang, T. Sun, Y. Tao, S. Genc, S. Mallya, and T. Basar, “Robust
multi-agent reinforcement learning with model uncertainty,” Advances
in Neural Information Processing Systems, vol. 33, pp. 10 571–10 583,
2020.
[12] L. Paull, J. Tani, H. Ahn, J. Alonso-Mora, L. Carlone, M. Cap,
Y. F. Chen, C. Choi, J. Dusek, Y. Fang et al., “Duckietown: an
open, inexpensive and flexible platform for autonomy education and
research,” in 2017 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and
Automation (ICRA).
IEEE, 2017, pp. 1497–1504.
[13] E. Koutsoupias and C. Papadimitriou, “Worst-case equilibria,” in An-
nual symposium on theoretical aspects of computer science. Springer,
1999, pp. 404–413.
[14] T. Roughgarden, Selfish routing and the price of anarchy. MIT press,
2005.
[15] R. E. Wang, M. Everett, and J. P. How, “R-maddpg for partially
observable environments and limited communication,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2002.06684, 2020.
[16] H. Zhang, W. Chen, Z. Huang, M. Li, Y. Yang, W. Zhang, and J. Wang,
“Bi-level actor-critic for multi-agent coordination,” in Proceedings of
the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, vol. 34, no. 05, 2020,
pp. 7325–7332.
[17] A. Dosovitskiy, G. Ros, F. Codevilla, A. Lopez, and V. Koltun, “Carla:
An open urban driving simulator,” in Conference on robot learning.
PMLR, 2017, pp. 1–16.
[18] S. Chen, J. Dong, P. Ha, Y. Li, and S. Labi, “Graph neural network
and reinforcement learning for multi-agent cooperative control of con-
nected autonomous vehicles,” Computer-Aided Civil and Infrastructure
Engineering, vol. 36, no. 7, pp. 838–857, 2021.
[19] H. Zhu, J. Yu, A. Gupta, D. Shah, K. Hartikainen, A. Singh, V. Kumar,
and S. Levine, “The ingredients of real-world robotic reinforcement
learning,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.12570, 2020.
[20] A. Gupta, J. Yu, T. Z. Zhao, V. Kumar, A. Rovinsky, K. Xu, T. Devlin,
and S. Levine, “Reset-free reinforcement learning via multi-task
learning: Learning dexterous manipulation behaviors without human
intervention,” in 2021 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and
Automation (ICRA).
IEEE, 2021, pp. 6664–6671.
[21] G. Wang, H. Niu, D. Zhu, J. Hu, X. Zhan, and G. Zhou, “Model:
A modularized end-to-end reinforcement learning framework for au-
tonomous driving,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.11573, 2021.
[22] B. Balaji, S. Mallya, S. Genc, S. Gupta, L. Dirac, V. Khare, G. Roy,
T. Sun, Y. Tao, B. Townsend et al., “Deepracer: Educational au-
tonomous racing platform for experimentation with sim2real reinforce-
ment learning,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1911.01562, 2019.
[23] C. Yu, A. Velu, E. Vinitsky, Y. Wang, A. Bayen, and Y. Wu, “The
surprising effectiveness of ppo in cooperative, multi-agent games,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2103.01955, 2021.
[24] R. Lowe, Y. I. Wu, A. Tamar, J. Harb, O. Pieter Abbeel, and I. Mor-
datch, “Multi-agent actor-critic for mixed cooperative-competitive
environments,” Advances in neural information processing systems,
vol. 30, 2017.
[25] T. Rashid, M. Samvelyan, C. Schroeder, G. Farquhar, J. Foerster, and
S. Whiteson, “Qmix: Monotonic value function factorisation for deep
multi-agent reinforcement learning,” in International Conference on
Machine Learning.
PMLR, 2018, pp. 4295–4304.
[26] Duckietown, “DuckieBot MOOC Founder’s edition datasheet,” DB21-
M datasheet, Dec 2020.
[27] M.
Chevalier-Boisvert,
F.
Golemo,
Y.
Cao,
B.
Mehta,
and
L.
Paull,
“Duckietown
environments
for
openai
gym,”
https://github.com/duckietown/gym-duckietown, 2018.
[28] S. Ercan, “Modelling strategies for a mobile robot,” Master’s thesis,
Swiss Federal Institute of Technology Zurich, 2019.
[29] P. G. Gipps, “A model for the structure of lane-changing decisions,”
Transportation Research Part B: Methodological, vol. 20, no. 5, pp.
403–414, 1986.
[30] S. Shalev-Shwartz, S. Shammah, and A. Shashua, “On a for-
mal model of safe and scalable self-driving cars,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1708.06374, 2017.
8820
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Texas at Arlington. Downloaded on June 27,2026 at 06:10:30 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
