IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL, VOL. 11, NO. 13, 1 JULY 2024
23985
Combating Uncertainties in Smart Grid Decision
Networks: Multiagent Reinforcement Learning
With Imperfect State Information
Arman Ghasemi
, Amin Shojaeighadikolaei
, and Morteza Hashemi
, Senior Member, IEEE
Abstract—Renewable energy sources (RESs), such as wind
and solar power, are increasingly being integrated into smart
grid systems. However, when compared to traditional energy
resources, the unpredictability of renewable energy generation
poses signiﬁcant challenges for both electricity providers and
utility companies. Furthermore, the large-scale integration of dis-
tributed energy resources (such as photovoltaics (PVs) systems)
creates new challenges for energy management in microgrids. To
tackle these issues, we consider a framework with two objectives:
1) combating uncertainty of renewable energy in smart grid by
leveraging time-series forecasting with long-short term memory
(LSTM) solutions and 2) establishing distributed and dynamic
decision-making framework with multiagent reinforcement learn-
ing (RL) with uncertain and imperfect state information. The
proposed framework addresses these objectives while considering
both wholesale and retail markets, thereby enabling efﬁcient
energy management in the presence of uncertain and distributed
RESs. Through extensive numerical simulations based on the
deep deterministic policy gradient (DDPG) RL algorithm, we
demonstrate that the proposed solution signiﬁcantly improves
the proﬁt of load serving entities (LSEs) by providing a more
accurate wind generation forecast. Furthermore, our results
demonstrate that the households with PV and battery instal-
lations can increase their proﬁts by using intelligent battery
charge/discharge actions determined by the DDPG agents.
Index Terms—Distributed energy management, reinforcement
learning
(RL),
renewable
energy
uncertainty,
wind
power
forecasting.
I. INTRODUCTION
R
ENEWABLE energy sources (RESs), such as wind and
solar, are increasingly being integrated into electric
power systems due to their environmental beneﬁts and fuel
requirements. According to [1], wind power will produce
20% of the U.S. electricity by 2030. Furthermore, the U.S.
Energy Information Administration (EIA) reports that solar
Manuscript received 3 August 2023; revised 15 November 2023 and 11
March 2024; accepted 8 April 2024. Date of publication 16 April 2024;
date of current version 26 June 2024. This work was supported in
part by NSF under Grant 1948511, Grant 1955561, and Grant 2212565.
(Arman Ghasemi and Amin Shojaeighadikolaei contributed equally to this
work.) (Corresponding author: Arman Ghasemi.)
Arman Ghasemi and Amin Shojaeighadikolaei are with the Graduate
School of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, University of
Kansas,
Lawrence,
KS
66045
USA
(e-mail:
arman.ghasemi@ku.edu;
amin.shojaei@ku.edu).
Morteza Hashemi is with the Department of Electrical Engineering and
Computer Science, University of Kansas, Lawrence, KS 66045 USA (e-mail:
mhashemi@ku.edu).
Digital Object Identiﬁer 10.1109/JIOT.2024.3389653
Fig. 1.
Electricity market structure with PV-equipped prosumers, WPP, and
CPP.
power installations in the residential sector have increased
by 34% from 2.9 GW in 2020 to 3.9 GW in 2021 [2].
Despite the advantages of wind and solar power generation,
their large-scale integration poses new challenges to smart
grid systems. One of the key challenges lies in managing the
uncertainties associated with large-scale integration of RESs.
These uncertainties manifest themselves in several ways,
including demand ﬂuctuations due to consumption behaviors,
supply variability due to renewable energy integration and
environmental conditions, and electricity price ﬂuctuations due
to dynamic pricing schemes, market structure, and policies.
As shown in Fig. 1, electricity market consists of two
types of markets: 1) wholesale market (i.e., generator and
distribution levels) with two types of pricing: day-ahead (DA)
and real-time (RT) prices and 2) retail market (consumers
and prosumers levels). Wind power plants (WPPs) are the
major source of renewable generation in wholesale market.
The output of WPPs is inﬂuenced by environmental fac-
tors (e.g., wind speed and direction), thereby resulting in
generation uncertainty. Concurrently, residential photovoltaic
(PV) systems integrated with energy storage are becoming
more common, which allows residential users (prosumers)
to actively engage in demand-side management by adjusting
energy use, battery charging/discharging, and selling excess
energy to the grid. This introduces additional uncertainties
due to user behavior and environmental conditions. Therefore,
ﬂuctuations and unpredictability in solar and wind energy
generation as well as users behaviors introduce generation and
demand uncertainty.
The independent system operator (ISO) manages wholesale
market prices and quantities, including locational marginal
2327-4662 c⃝2024 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Texas at Arlington. Downloaded on June 27,2026 at 06:37:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

23986
IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL, VOL. 11, NO. 13, 1 JULY 2024
prices (LMPs). Uncertainty from RESs causes LMP uncer-
tainties in both DA and RT markets. Load serving entities
(LSEs) use LMPs to set retail prices, but uncertainties in
wholesale markets, like unpredictable wind generation, affect
retail market dynamics. Therefore, the LSE must overcome
two speciﬁc challenges: 1) managing the uncertainty caused
by RESs in both wholesale and retail markets and 2) man-
aging and distributing energy economically in a setting with
distributed market participants, such as residential PV units
with energy storage.
Over the past few years, extensive research have focused
on addressing these challenges, covering topics like predicting
RES generation, optimizing energy distribution, and address-
ing uncertainties in demand response and energy management.
To address uncertainties, two primary research approaches
have gained prominence: deep learning (DL) forecasting [3],
[4], [5], [6], [7] and reinforcement learning (RL) for decision
making [8], [9], [10], [11], [12], [13], [14], [15], [16],
[17], [18], [19], [20], [21], [22]. From a wholesale market
perspective, researchers have explored DL and RL techniques
to tackle uncertainties like LMP prediction and bidding strate-
gies [3], [4], [8]. On the other hand, in the retail market,
RL and DL are extensively utilized to address uncertainties
in solving demand response and energy management prob-
lems [6], [7], [13], [14]. Notably, some recent studies have
employed a combined approach integrating RL-based decision
making and DL-based forecasting frameworks [23], [24], [25],
[26], [27], [28], [29], [30], [31], [32]. However, these works
primarily focused on addressing price and PV uncertainties
solely at the end-user level, utilizing a single-agent RL
framework, without considering the wholesale market. To
the best of our knowledge, no prior work has investigated
the impacts of uncertainty with dynamic energy management
utilizing deep RL (DRL) techniques. This motivates us to
develop an uniﬁed framework that takes into account: 1) wind
power generation uncertainty; 2) LMP uncertainty; 3) dynamic
retail prices; and 4) demand-side uncertainty in the presence of
prosumers.
In this article, we present an in-depth investigation of the
effects of various uncertainties on multiagent RL (MARL)
decision making in smart grid systems, as well as strategies for
dealing with such uncertainties. We consider the wholesale and
retail markets generation and price uncertainties together with
prosumer reactions to the price signal in order to accomplish
three objectives: 1) increase the LSE proﬁt; 2) reduce the
prosumers’ electricity bills; and 3) decrease the peak-to-
average (PAR) ratio of the system. To achieve these goals, we
propose a novel framework that integrates the long-short term
memory (LSTM) model for time-series forecasting and deep
deterministic policy gradient (DDPG) RL agent to take optimal
energy management actions under imperfect and uncertain
state information. LSTM-based time-series forecasting is used
to address the problem of uncertainty in wind power genera-
tion. In this case, the DDPG algorithm works in harmony with
the LSTM model to establish a distributed decision-making
framework that relies on the LSTM forecast to optimize energy
management actions.
In summary, our main contributions are as follows.
1) We formulate a two-level optimization problem that
considers generation, distribution, and load level simul-
taneously. The envisioned system model includes wind,
solar, and energy storage system as renewable sources
to
model
the
generation,
consumption,
and
price
uncertainty.
2) To deal with wind power uncertainty, time-series fore-
casting is implemented using LSTM module to allow
the LSE to increase its proﬁt by dynamically changing
electricity prices while taking the LMP uncertainty into
account.
3) Agent-based DDPG RL approach is fully integrated with
LSTM to run energy management economically through
training LSE and prosumers agents.
4) We examine the performance of our proposed LSTM-
DDPG framework on an IEEE ﬁve-bus system model.
Using real wind farm data set and through extensive
numerical results, we demonstrate that the proposed
framework effectively enhances the performance of
the LSE and prosumers. For example, the suggested
approach enhances LSE proﬁt by 86% when compared
to a time-of-use (TOU) pricing scenario.
The remainder of this article is organized as follows.
Section II presents a summary of related works. The system
model and problem formulation are described in Section III.
Section IV introduces the proposed LSTM-DDPG framework,
and numerical results are provided in Section V. Section VI
concludes this article.
II. RELATED WORK
Extensive research has been conducted in the domain of
smart grid energy management applications, with a speciﬁc
emphasis on mitigating various sources of uncertainty. In this
section, we investigate the works that have deployed machine
learning techniques for such problems, speciﬁcally DL-based
forecasting and RL-based decision making techniques.
A. Combating Uncertainties With Forecasting
Forecasting with high precision can enhance the decision
making in smart grid by providing an estimate of the state
information (e.g., wind generation within the next 24 h) [33].
Statistical methods, such as the auto-regressive moving aver-
age model (ARMA) have been used to address the forecasting
problem in smart grids [34]. However, due to scalability
issues, evaluating complicated nonlinear data patterns using
statistical approaches can be difﬁcult [35]. As a result, machine
learning models, particularly deep neural networks, are becom-
ing increasingly popular for forecasting purposes. Among
deep neural networks, different variants of recurrent neural
networks (RNNs), such as LSTM have attracted much interest
from the research community due to their internal memory
features [5], [6], [7]. For example, Xia et al. [5] proposed a
stacked DL model based on RNN variants for the prediction
of renewable energy and electricity load. Jahangir et al. [7]
discussed uncertainty modeling problems in smart grids, as
well as proposing a clustering method combined with an
LSTM model to make electricity load and price predictions
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Texas at Arlington. Downloaded on June 27,2026 at 06:37:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

GHASEMI et al.: COMBATING UNCERTAINTIES IN SMART GRID DECISION NETWORKS
23987
more accurate. In [6], an LSTM-based framework is proposed
to forecast the electric load of individual residential users,
which is compared to the aggregated load forecasting of the
system. These works are mostly focused on handling uncer-
tainties using forecasting techniques, while not considering
energy management and dynamic decision making under such
uncertain conditions.
Besides the research works that are focused on uncertainties
in smart grid systems, there is a multitude of related works
that are focused on investigating the impacts of uncertainties
in the general RL frameworks [9], [10]. Dealing with state
uncertainty becomes even more challenging in the context
of MARL, as the decisions of an agent with uncertain state
information affect not only its own returns but also those
of other agents [11], [36], [37]. However, these solutions are
not speciﬁcally designed to address uncertainties in smart
grid decision-making scenarios. Given the distinct nature of
uncertainties in smart grid networks and complex market
structures (i.e., wholesale and retail markets, with DA and
RT pricing), actions taken with uncertain state information in
the wholesale market impact the decisions made by the retail
market agents, and vice versa. In this article, we investigate
the uncertainties in the wholesale and retail markets and the
associated impacts on distributed energy management.
B. Reinforcement Learning for Energy Management
RL has recently become popular in handling energy
management problems. For instance, in [12], double deep
Q-learning network (DDQN) method was used to manage a
community battery energy storage system (BESS). To combat
the price signal uncertainty, they considered ±5% uncertainty
interval. Likewise, Li et al. [13] presented a demand response
framework of scheduling home appliances using DRL method.
They utilized model predictive control (MPC) to forecast the
future electricity price and outdoor temperature. In another
work [14], the authors utilized Rayleigh and Beta proba-
bility distributions to model renewable uncertainty in the
multiagent Q-learning framework for micro-grid (MG) energy
management. Similarly, Xiao et al. [15] presented an energy
management method for multienergy MGs (MEMGs) using
improved deep Q-network by modeling the uncertainty of
renewable generation with probabilistic models. In another
work [16], the authors proposed an energy scheduling for a
microgird to handle the uncertainties of PV generation and
load demand by integrating two classical deep-RL algorithms
(i.e., DQN and recurrent DPG).
Unlike DQN, which has discrete action space, policy-
gradient methods, such as proximal policy optimization
(PPO) [17] and DDPG [18], [19], [20], [21], [22] work in
continuous action spaces and provide a more realistic control
solution. For instance, Guo et al. [17] and Dolatabadi et al. [20]
utilized common statistical Weibull and Beta distributions for
the prediction of wind speed and solar irradiance in the PPO
and DDPG frameworks, respectively. In [19], RL method is
used to model distributed energy management in MGs, but
no prediction model is proposed to address the uncertainty.
Lei et al. [21] utilized DDPG with ﬁnite-horizon partially
observable Markov decision process (POMDP) model to
capture the future electricity consumption and PV generation
in MGs energy management. To tackle the uncertainty of load
demand and renewable generation in wholesale market, Zhu
et al. [22] proposed a dispatching strategy to allow LSEs to
dynamically optimize their strategies under DA-RT markets
by considering a single DDPG agent. It should be noted that
these works [12], [13], [14], [15], [16], [17], [18], [19], [20],
[21], [22] do not include forecasting using DL.
C. Combined Forecasting and Energy Management
Combined forecasting and RL framework has been used in
several applications, such as route trajectories and autonomous
vehicle controls [38]. This technique has been shown to be
efﬁcient in smart grid energy management applications [23],
[24], [25], [26]. Amer et al. [23] presented a combined
single-DQN and home energy management system (HEMS)
demand response framework that beneﬁts both customers and
operators in terms of electricity bills and network mainte-
nance, respectively. They assumed that all electricity price,
PV generation, and transformer load prediction data are
obtained from a given prediction process. Lu et al. [24]
utilized a forecasting model based on artiﬁcial neural network
(ANN) to predict future price for home energy management.
Xiong et al. [25] developed a two-level RL framework to
deal with the optimal pricing of multiple MGs. To combat
the uncertainties, they utilized prediction interval using neural
network with bootstrap. In [26], an extreme learning machine
(ELM)-based feed-forward NN was used to predict the future
trend of electricity price and PV generation. This framework
was integrated with a DQN framework to optimize a home
energy management problem. Our approach differs from these
works [24], [25], [26] in that we combine the LSTM engine,
which works well with processing time-series data and DDPG,
which is applicable and more realistic for continuous spaces.
In addition, we consider both the wholesale and retail market
structures in smart grid systems.
Recently, LSTM has been integrated into RL frameworks
in several studies [27], [28], [29], [30], [31], [32]. Cao
et al. [27] and Wan et al. [28] combined LSTM with a sin-
gle DQN agent to optimize battery energy arbitrage and
EV charge/discharge scheduling, respectively. Unlike [28],
Zhang et al. [29] combined a single DDPG agent with
an LSTM engine to continuously control the trend of EV
charge/discharge. Xiong et al. [30] considered the uncertainties
in HEMS, and develop an LSTM-based Meta-RL approach to
learn transferable scheduling strategies in HEMS. Ye et al. [31]
combined LSTM with an interior-point policy optimization
(IPO) RL for the energy management of an MG by considering
exogenous uncertainty factors, such as renewable generation
and variability of demand. They used LSTM to extract the
spatialtemporal correlation features of MG. Khan et al. [32]
provided a framework for voltage control using a combined
LSTM and DQN algorithm. In these works, LSTM is utilized
to predict the future electricity price to combat price uncer-
tainty. They have considered a predeﬁned TOU pricing scheme
and leveraged LSTM for DA load forecasting. In contrast, we
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Texas at Arlington. Downloaded on June 27,2026 at 06:37:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

23988
IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL, VOL. 11, NO. 13, 1 JULY 2024
consider the wholesale and retail markets and achieve dynamic
pricing using DDPG agents.
Compared with the previous work, we aim to address two
speciﬁc research gaps. First, limited work has focused on
a combined RL-based decision making and DL-based fore-
casting framework. This integrated approach could improve
our ability to handle uncertainties in the electricity mar-
ket. Second, as indicated in the aforementioned literature,
the integration of renewable resources transforms LSEs into
active participants in the wholesale market. This implies that
uncertainties in the retail market can affect the wholesale
market, and vice versa. Consequently, addressing uncertain-
ties in this complex environment requires more thorough
investigation and correlation analysis. While there are some
works that jointly consider wholesale and retail electricity mar-
kets [39], [40], [41], their proposed solutions are mostly based
on model-based optimization and game theory approaches. For
instance, in [40], bi-level stochastic programming is used to
model active distribution networks with high penetration of
DERs that strategically participate in the wholesale electricity
market. Furthermore, they do not jointly consider renewable
sources in the wholesale (i.e., wind generation) and retail
markets (distributed PV users). To the best of our knowledge,
the integration of wind uncertainties with dynamic energy
management using DRL methods in an uniﬁed framework
has not been investigated before. Therefore, in this article,
we develop a framework based on DDPG and LSTM to
jointly model the wholesale and retail markets with several
key components, including: 1) uncertainty of wind power
generation; 2) uncertainty of LMP; and 3) dynamic retail
prices; and 4) demand-side uncertainty in the presence of
prosumers.
III. SYSTEM MODEL AND PROBLEM FORMULATION
In this section, we present the system model, followed by
the problem formulations for all market players (i.e., the LSE
and distributed prosumers).
A. Power Market Model
This study develops a decision-making framework that
combats uncertainties associated with renewable generation
penetration, while optimizing the economic beneﬁts for elec-
tricity providers and residential users. To this end, the
envisioned system model is illustrated in Fig. 1. The model
includes active prosumers as distributed market players,
equipped with PV rooftop panels and energy storage systems.
LSE represents a distribution utility player, which is respon-
sible for aggregating load on behalf of residential users and
making appropriate arrangements in wholesale markets to
meet the total load. An ISO is responsible for ensuring
reliability and adequacy of the power system. WPP and
conventional power plant (CPP) are the two types of large-
scale generation units.
Our envisioned energy market consists of DA and RT
markets, where ISO determines the clearing price and clearing
power quantities for both markets. The DA and RT LMPs
calculations are following the same rules. From the wholesale
Fig. 2.
Marginal electricity producer cost curve.
market perspective, uncertainty in wind generation affects
LMPs in both DA and RT markets directly. Consequently,
this uncertainty causes a mismatch between DA predictions
and RT available power, as shown in Fig. 2. This ﬁgure
illustrates a sorted incremental cost curve of a piecewise linear
approximation when various power producers are present. As
illustrated, this mismatch increases the risk of monetary loss
for wholesale participants, e.g., LSE. From the retail market
perspective, LSE dynamically determines the retail electricity
market to overcome its monetary loss. Consequently, it will
have an adverse effect on retail market players’ electricity
bill, such as prosumers. As a result, we have a two-level
optimization problem. On one hand, the LSE participates in
wholesale market to procure the energy needs for residential
users, while trying to maximize its local proﬁt. On the other
hand, in the residential users level, active prosumers aim
to reduce their electricity bills by participating in the retail
market. Next, we deﬁne this two-level optimization problem.
B. Distributed Market Players
In the residential-users network, prosumers participate in
the retail market as distributed players. The prosumers will
produce energy to meet their demand, charge their battery, or
sell the energy back to the grid during the peak PV generation
times or high price periods. Each user i belongs to the set
of active prosumer (denoted by NP) or the set of passive
consumers (denoted by NC). Thus, i ∈D = {NP ∪NC}. The
active prosumers’ energy demand at the time slot t is deﬁned
as follows:
ei,t = di,t −gi,t −bi,t ∀i ∈NP
(1)
where di,t, gi,t, and bi,t denote the energy consumption, PV
generation, and energy charge/discharge from the battery,
respectively. PV generations must be limited as follows:
0 ≤gi,t ≤gmax
i
∀i ∈NP.
(2)
The prosumer’s battery is modeled by the general ESS char-
acterization, such as charging and discharging rate, maximum
capacity, and state of charge of the battery, which are described
as follows:
SoCmin
i
≤1
Qi

t∈T
bi,t + SoCi(0) ≤SoCmax
i
∀i ∈NP (3)
bdis,min
i
≤bi,t ≤bcharge,max
i
∀i ∈NP.
(4)
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Texas at Arlington. Downloaded on June 27,2026 at 06:37:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

GHASEMI et al.: COMBATING UNCERTAINTIES IN SMART GRID DECISION NETWORKS
23989
In addition, each end user’s total load Li,t for consumer and
prosumer is deﬁned in (5), i.e.,
Li,t =
di,t if i ∈NC
ei,t if i ∈NP.
(5)
Thus, the aggregated load that represents the energy transfer
between the LSE and residential users is obtained as LD
t
=
|D|
i=1 Li,t.
The goal of each prosumer is to maximize its local revenue,
or conversely, minimize its total electricity bill calculated as
follows:
Epro
i
=

t∈T

1 −˜λi

ei,tCs
t + ˜λiei,tCb
t

∀i ∈NP
(6)
in which ˜λi ∈{0, 1}, such that if ei,t is non-negative, then
˜λi = 1. This condition implies that the prosumer i needs to
buy the energy from the LSE at the price of Cb
t . On the other
hand, ˜λi = 0 means that the prosumer sells its excess energy
back to the LSE at the price of Cs
t .
Given the formulated energy exchange among distributed
users and LSE, the objective of users is to reduce their
electricity bills. To this end, prosumers decide to take an action
on their batteries after receiving the electricity price from the
LSE. In this regard, the optimization problem in the residential
level is deﬁned as follows:
Userlevel:
	 minimize
bi,t

i∈NP
Epro
i
subject to: (1)−(5).
(7)
It is also noteworthy that the aforementioned constraints
determine prosumers’ power balance equation, PV generation
limit, as well as battery charging and discharging limits. The
control variable in this optimization problem, denoted by bi,t,
is the amount of energy that is charging or discharging from
the prosumers’ battery.
C. Load Serving Entity
The LSE seeks to maximize its own total proﬁt, while
incorporating different uncertainty sources, ranging from wind
power generation, PV rooftop panels, and net demand. The
total cost (TC) of the LSE is deﬁned as follows:
TC =

t∈T
⎧
⎨
⎩LDA
t
ρDA
t
+
|NP|

i=1
ei,tCb
t ˜λi + LtρRT
t
⎫
⎬
⎭.
(8)
The TC incorporates the TC of the LSE to procure energy
from the wholesale market as well as from the distributed
market players, i.e., active prosumers. LDA and ρDA indicate
the forecasted load and LMP in DA market. ei,t indicates
the demand from the ith prosumer. Lt
= LRT
t
−LDA
t
represents the RT and DA demand deﬁciency, which is used
to calculate the LSE cost for the load uncertainty in the
RT market. Thus, the LSE net proﬁt can be calculated by
subtracting the LSE costs from the aggregated residential load
demand, i.e.,
RLSE =

t∈T
⎧
⎨
⎩
|NC|

j=1
LRT
j,t Cs
t +
|NP|

k=1
LRT
k,t Cs
t
⎫
⎬
⎭−TC.
(9)
Power Balance: LSE operations should maintain balance
between consumption and generation at each time instants.
Therefore, power balance equation is deﬁned as follows:
|D|

i=1
Li,t =
|NG|

i=1
PG
i,t + Pwp
t
(10)
where the aggregated demand of the residential users in the
left-hand side should be met by the power producers PG
i,t, as
well as wind power generator that is indicated as Pwp
t .
Generation Constraints: According to Fig. 1, CPPs are
considered as one type of generator, along with WPP as the
RES in generation side. Each generation facility i ∈NG has
a minimum and maximum generation limit, as described in
(11) and (12). The generation ramp rate is deﬁned in (13)
to demonstrate how quickly a plant can change its output.
Therefore, we have
PG,min
i
≤PG
i,t ≤PG,max
i
∀i ∈NG,
(11)
0 ≤Pwp
t
≤Pwp,max,
(12)
RRmin
i
≤PG
i,t+1 −PG
i,t ≤RRmax
i
∀i ∈NG.
(13)
LSE Optimization: In the upper-level market, LSE aims to
maximize its own proﬁt. LSE is trying to achieve this objective
through changing the electricity buy and sell price. Therefore,
the optimization problem in the LSE-level can be deﬁned as
follows:
LSElevel:
	 maximize
Cbt ,Cst
RLSE,
subject to: (10)−(13).
(14)
Here, the objective function includes power procurement
from the wholesale market as well as the amount of energy
sold to residential users. The constraints include power genera-
tion limits, generation ramp rate limits, and the power balance,
as previously described.
IV. INTEGRATED LSTM AND DDPG FRAMEWORK
To tackle the formulated optimization problems, we develop
a framework consisting of a multiagent DDPG algorithm inte-
grated with LSTM, as shown in Fig. 3. In general, LSTM [42]
is an enhanced version of the RNN. LSTM is proposed as a
possible solution to overcome the major weakness of RNNs in
handling time series data with long-range time dependencies.
Integrated with LSTM, our proposed framework consists of
two types of DDPG agents: 1) load serving agent (LSA) that
is located at the LSE level and 2) prosumers’ agents (PAs)
that are located at the prosumer level. Furthermore, an LSTM
forecasting engine is integrated into the LSA to combat wind
power uncertainty. In this case, the LSTM forecasts the next
24-h wind generation based on the collected data, and supports
the LSE participation in the DA market. Then, the LSA
observes this prediction alongside the information from the
determined LMPs and residential users network to determine
the electricity sell and buy prices for the retail market. In
response to the price signals set by the LSA, the PA decides
whether to support the LSE or not by taking actions in terms
of amount of battery charge and discharge. To better analyze
the proposed LSTM-DDPG solution for sequential decision
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Texas at Arlington. Downloaded on June 27,2026 at 06:37:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

23990
IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL, VOL. 11, NO. 13, 1 JULY 2024
Fig. 3.
Our proposed framework that integrates LSTM forecasting with DDPG agents. The LSE DDPG agent determines the electricity price based on the
observation vector, and the DDPG agents on the prosumer side take action on battery charging/discharging.
making, in the remainder of this section, we discuss the
background, architecture, training, and validating procedure of
the proposed framework.
A. Background
DDPG: DRL frameworks are effective solutions for han-
dling sequential decision-making problems. DDPG is a
model-free, off-policy, and gradient-based RL framework,
which combines the DPG method introduced by Silver in
2014 [43] and DQN. Similar to the standard RL meth-
ods, DDPG framework can be described by a ﬁve-tuple
{S, A, r, p, γ }, in which S and A are the set of states
and actions; r is the reward function; and p is a transition
function between different states. DDPG consists of two
networks: 1) actor and 2) critic, where the parameterized actor
function μ(s|θμ), with parameter θμ, holds the policy and
deterministically maps the states to a speciﬁc action. The
term deterministic refers to the fact that the actor network
provides an exact output instead of a probability distribution
over actions, μ(s) = arg maxa Q(s, a). In addition, the critic
network describes as action-value function Q(s, a|θQ), with
parameter θQ. In order to facilitate training and guarantee
convergence, DDPG creates a copy of these two networks:
1) actor target with parameter θμ′ and 2) critic target with
parameter θQ′. The learning process of DDPG consists of two
phases. Similar to Q-learning, the critic estimates the Q-values
using the Bellman equation
Q(s, a) = r + γ Es′∼s,a′∼π

Q

s′, a′
(15)
where γ ∈[0, 1] is the discount rate, and (s′, a′) denotes
the next state-action pair. In DDPG, the next-state Q-values
are calculated with the target value and target policy network.
Thus, the critic estimates Q-values and updates its parameters
by minimizing the mean-squared loss function between the
updated Q-value and the original Q-value, as follows:
L

θQ
= E(s,a,r,s′)∼B

(r + γ Q′
s′, π′(s′) −Q(s, a|θ)
2
(16)
where B denotes the replay buffer. For the policy function,
the goal of the actor is to maximize the expected discounted
returns by interacting with the environment as J(μ)
≈
E[Q(s, a)|s = st, at = μ(st)]. To calculate the policy loss,
we take the derivative of the objective function ∇θμJ(μ) ≈
Es[∇θμQ(s, a)], respect to the policy parameter. By applying
the chain rule, the actor is updated as follows:
∇θμJ ≈1
N

i∈B
∇aQ(s, a)|s=si, a=μ(si)∇θμμ

s|θμ
|s=si. (17)
In order to minimize the loss function in (16), DDPG cal-
culates the gradient of L(θQ) and updates the critic network
parameters by gradient descent as follows:
θQ ←θQ −lrc∇θQL

θQ
(18)
where lrc is a small learning rate. On the other hand, to
improve the performance of the policy and maximize the
accumulative return. The actor network updates its parameters
using gradient ascent with a small learning rate lra as follows:
θμ ←θμ + lra∇θμJ.
(19)
After updating θμ and θQ, DDPG softly updates the target
critic and actor networks with a small constant τ
θQ′ ←τθQ + (1 −τ)θQ′,
θμ′ ←τθμ + (1 −τ)θμ′ (20)
where τ ≪1 greatly improves the learning stability. Given the
system model proposed in Fig. 1, our DDPG agents interact
with the electricity market environment to maximize their local
returns from the environment, as illustrated in Fig. 3. In the
following sections, we ﬁrst describe the environment and then
present the DDPG agents by deﬁning their actions and reward
functions.
B. Environment Setup
The dynamic energy market proposed in Fig. 1 is considered
as our RL environment. In this case, the PA and LSA agents
interact with the environment and their goal is to gather
maximum reward possible from the environment through their
actions. Each agent is only able to observe a subset of
environment states due to various factors, such as physical
limitations, and privacy and data security. We denote all the
states of the environment by S = SPA ∪SLSA, wherein SPA
and SLSA denote the set of observable states by the PA and
LSA agents, respectively.
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Texas at Arlington. Downloaded on June 27,2026 at 06:37:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

GHASEMI et al.: COMBATING UNCERTAINTIES IN SMART GRID DECISION NETWORKS
23991
PA States: At each time slot t, the PA state for the ith
prosumer is deﬁned as
sPA
i,t = {di,t, gi,t, SoCi,t, Cs
t−N, . . . , Cs
t , Cb
t−N, . . . , Cb
t } ∈SPA
where (Cs
t−N, . . . , Cs
t ) and (Cb
t−N, . . . , Cb
t ) denote the electric-
ity sell and buy price in the past N steps. For the PA, the
future price is uncertain, thus observing the past steps of the
electricity price helps the PA to infer future price trends as
suggested in [28].
LSA States: At the same time step t, the LSA state is deﬁned
as
sLSA
t
= {˜Pwp
t , . . . , ˜Pwp
t+24, ρDA
t−M, . . . , ρDA
t
, ρRT
t−M, . . . , ρRT
t
,
LDA
t
, LRT
t , Et} ∈SLSA
where ˜Pwp
t , . . . , ˜Pwp
t+24 are the predicted wind generation over
the next 24 h, which comes from the LSTM engine. As
described, the uncertainty generated from wind power shifts
to the uncertainty in LMP prices. Thus, the LSA observes
the ﬁnal M time step DA and RT LMPs, denoted as
ρDA
t−M, . . . , ρDA
t
and ρRT
t−M, . . . , ρRT
t
. Moreover, LDA
t
and LRT
t
are the network demand in DA and RT markets, respectively.
Et denotes the total amount of power purchased from the
prosumer network at time t, which is calculated as Et =
|NP|
i=1 (1 −˜λi)|ei,t|.
State Normalization: As described in the previous section,
the environment states consist of several features, which have
different ranges and distributions. To make all the variables
contribute equally, at any given, we standardize the set of
the observations before feeding them to the neural networks.
This is known as state normalization. In addition, for the
layers’ normalization, we use batch normalization (BN) to
improve the Lipschitzness of the loss function and increase the
stability and predictability of the gradients, which decreases
the gradient vanishing problem and improves the training
speed [44].
C. DDPG Agents Setup
The PA and LSA agents interact with the environment by
performing an action iteratively to maximize their local long-
term returns. At any given time slot t, each agent observes its
corresponding observable states st from the environment and
takes an action at. After that, the environment provides the
agent an immediate reward rt, reﬂecting the beneﬁts of the
action, and transitions to the next state st+1. Thus, each agent
independently learns its own policy.
PA Setup: For the ith prosumer, the charge/discharge com-
mand to the energy storage is the action determined by the
PAi, which is shown by aPA
i,t = {bi,t} ∈APA
i , such that bi,t is
continuous action in [bmin
t
, bmax
t
]. The ultimate goal of the PA
is to minimize the local billing cycle in (6), which is deﬁned
as follows:
rPAi
t
=

t∈T
{

1 −˜λi

ei,tCs
t + ˜λiei,tCb
t }
(21)
where rPAi
t
represents the ith prosumer reward.
LSA Setup: To solve the optimization problem in (14), at
any given time, the LSA determines the electricity sell and
Algorithm 1 Proposed DDPG and LSTM Training Pipeline
Train the LSTM engine using historical data (Input features vector X)
Generate day-ahead predictions using LSTM
Algorithm:
1: for each DDPG agent do
2:
Initialize critic, actor networks Q(s, a|θQ), μ(s|θμ) with parameters
θQ, and θμ
3:
Initialize target critic, actor networks with parameters θQ′ ←θQ, and
θμ′ ←θμ
4:
Initialize replay buffer BPA and BLSA
5: end for
6: for each Episode do
7:
Initialize the environment, set sPA
.,0 →0, sLSA
0
→0
8:
for each iteration t ∈T do
9:
LSA determines the Cbt and Cst in Eq. (14)
10:
LSA broadcast the electricity sell/buy prices to minimize Eq. (9)
11:
for each prosumer k ∈NP do
12:
PA determines bk,t to minimize Eq. (7), then create sPA
k,t+1
13:
PA receives the corresponding reward rPAk
t
14:
end for
15:
PA broadcast the new prosumers’ network proﬁles LDA
t+1, LRT
t+1, Et+1
back to LSA
16:
LSA creates sLSA
t+1 and receives corresponding reward rLSA
t
17:
if t ≤Tcap then
18:
Store (sPA
k,t , bk,t, rPAk
t
, sPA
k,t+1) in BPA
19:
Store (sLSA
t
, Cbt , Cst , rLSA
t
, sLSA
t+1 ) in BLSA
20:
else
21:
Randomly choose mini-batch tuples from BPA and BLSA
22:
Update LSA and PA with Eq. (15), Eq. (16), Eq. (17), Eq. (18),
and Eq. (19)
23:
Update target networks with Eq. (20)
24:
end if
25:
end for
26: end for
buy prices Cs
t and Cb
t to control the energy management over
the network. Therefore, the action space for the LSA is shown
as aLSA
t
= {Cs
t , Cb
t } ∈ALSA, where Cs
t and Cb
t are continuous
actions in [Cmin
t
, Cmax
t
]. To maximize the proﬁt of the LSA in
(9), the LSA reward function is deﬁned as follows:
rLSA
t
= LD
t Cs
t −
|NP|

i=1
˜λi|ei,t|Cb
t −

PG
t + Pwp
t

ρt
(22)
where rLSA
t
is the LSA reward at time slot t.
D. Integrated LSTM-DDPG Pipeline
The pseudocode of the training pipeline is given in
Algorithm 1. As illustrated, in the ﬁrst phase, we train the
LSTM engine using the historical real data and tune it for
future utilization. In the second phase, we utilize the trained
forecasting engine in training the LSA and PA DDPG agents.
For LSTM training phase, as illustrated in Fig. 3, we use wind
speed, wind direction, temperature, and wind power as the
inputs of the forecasting engine, which is deﬁned as X, vector
of input features. These are the most correlated features in
forecasting the future wind generation. In order to help LSTM
training, all features should be on a similar scale. This helps
to stabilize the gradient descent steps. Thus, we normalize
the input data to the LSTM. Also, we use root mean squared
error (RMSE) as the performance metric of the forecasting to
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Texas at Arlington. Downloaded on June 27,2026 at 06:37:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

23992
IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL, VOL. 11, NO. 13, 1 JULY 2024
evaluate the accuracy of our prediction, which is deﬁned as
follows:
RMSE =




1
n
n

j=1
1
h
h

i=1

Pwp
ij −˜Pwp
ij
2
.
(23)
In addition to RMSE, mean absolute percentage error
(MAPE) is a statistical measure used to assess the accuracy
of forecasting. It calculates the average of absolute percentage
errors between the actual values and the forecasted values. The
MAPE is given by
MAPE =
⎛
⎝1
n
n

j=1
1
h
h

i=1

Pwp
ij −˜Pwp
ij
Pwp
ij

⎞
⎠× 100%
(24)
where h is the forecasting time horizon, n is the number of
testing sets, Pwp
ij
is the actual value, and ˜Pwp
ij
is the forecast
value at point i of the jth testing set.
Forecasting the future wind helps the LSA DDPG agent
in participating in the DA and RT markets. As discussed in
Fig. 2, the mismatch in forecasting leads to mismatch in LMP
prices, which affects the LSA’s return in (22). Therefore, in
the second phase, the future predicted wind is fed to the actor
and critic networks of LSA DDPG as observation. At each
episode of the training of each DDPG agent, ﬁrst, we sample
a minibatch of the replay buffer B to evaluate the local and
target Q-value. Then, we obtain the gradient of loss function
deﬁned in (16) and gradient of policy network deﬁned in (17).
Next, we update the gradients by (18) and (19). Finally, we
update the target networks by (20).
V. NUMERICAL RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
In this section, we evaluate the performance of the proposed
energy management framework in the presence of renewable
generation uncertainties. We consider two main sources of
uncertainties in renewable generations, one from the wind
farm located in the wholesale market, and the other from PV
rooftop panels located in the residential network. In addition,
to better deal with the uncertainty of the future electricity
price, our PA observes the electricity price history to capture
the information in price’s trend in RT. In this section, we
ﬁrst present the experimental settings. Next, we show the PA
and LSA behavior, and investigate the performance of the
proposed energy management framework in the presence of
uncertainties.
A. Simulation Setting
Power System Setup: To evaluate the performance of the
proposed energy management framework, we use a modiﬁed
IEEE ﬁve-bus system, as depicted in Fig. 4. On the generation
side of this system model, there are two small size gas turbines
on buses A and E. Without loss of generality, we forgo the
limits for the transmission systems. Generators G1 and G2 are
called base and reserve generation units, respectively. In this
article, we consider the quadratic approximation model for
Fig. 4.
Single-line diagram of the modiﬁed IEEE ﬁve-bus system.
the incremental costs for these two generators based on the
following cost functions:
F(G1) = α1 + α2PG
1,t + α3

PG
1,t
2
(25)
F(G2) = β1 + β2PG
2,t + β3

PG
2,t
2
(26)
where the coefﬁcients are derived from [45], and set
as
[α1, α2, α3]
=
[100, 10, 0.2]
and
[β1, β2, β3]
=
[200, 15, 0.35]. The maximum capacity of G1 and G2 are 15
and 100 MW, respectively. In addition, a WPP is connected to
bus A with the price 5 $/MWh. The WPP generation proﬁles
are extracted from historical data provided by [46]. On the
residential user side, the LSE performs energy distribution
among buses B, C, and D. The prosumers’ network consist of
ﬁve prosumers is located on bus D, while the loads on buses
B and C are the consumers’ network. The daily two double-
peak load and PV generation curves mimic the real-world
trends reported by California ISO to exemplify real-world
operation [47]. We leverage the LMPs calculations framework
provided in [48], which has been eliminated from this article
for the sake of exposition.
LSTM and DDPG Setup: As described in Section IV, we
implement DDPG agents for the LSE and PAs as well as
LSTM for wind power prediction. To this end, the hyper-
parameters and simulation setups used for DDPG agents and
LSTM, such as discount factor (future rewards weighting),
actor/critic optimizer (optimization algorithms), actor learn-
ing rate/momentum (update speed and stability), and target
smoothing (noise reduction for target updates), are listed in
Table I. The simulation setup is implemented in Python with
PyTorch 1.12.1. Simulation results are obtained by episodic
updating across 4000 episodes, each of which represents a
24-h cycle with a sampling time of 15 min.
For our study, we used a data set from a 14 MW wind
farm, located in the Zhangye region of China [46]. This
data set has been recorded from January 2018 until March
2020. There are a variety of operational, environmental, and
power generation metrics included in this data set, including
active and reactive power, component temperatures, blade
pitch angles, rotor RPM, turbine status, wind direction, and
wind speed. This data set provides a comprehensive list of
features to achieve robust forecasting and analysis of wind
power.
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Texas at Arlington. Downloaded on June 27,2026 at 06:37:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

GHASEMI et al.: COMBATING UNCERTAINTIES IN SMART GRID DECISION NETWORKS
23993
TABLE I
HYPERPARAMETERS AND SIMULATION PARAMETERS
Wind power data was scaled down to ﬁt the test system
model. This initial data set contains missing values, which
could happen due to various reasons, such as a faulty recording
device, etc. To resolve this issue and improve the performance
of our proposed forecasting framework, we use the K-nearest-
neighbor method to estimate the missing values. In the second
step, the data set is modiﬁed to be in a sliding window format
with observation of the past 24 h to develop a short term
forecasting of wind power. The data are then divided by 70%
for training, 10% for validation, and 20% for testing the LSTM
model. In our implementation, the selection and tuning of
the LSTM model parameters, such as the number of neurons,
activation function, learning rate, batch size, and number of
epochs, were guided by the training loss and the value of
RMSE on a validation data set. During the training phase,
we continuously monitored the training loss to ensure that
the model was learning effectively and making progress in
capturing the underlying patterns in the data. Simultaneously,
we evaluated the model’s performance on a separate validation
data set by computing the RMSE, which is a robust metric
to assess the model’s forecasting accuracy. The goal was to
achieve a lower RMSE, as it indicates a better ﬁt of the model
to the data.
In our implementation, a stacked LSTM model consists of
100 neurons with tanh activation function, and the optimizer
is Adam with a learning rate of 0.001. The batch size
is 64, and the number of iteration epochs is 100. In our
implementation, we employed the sliding window method,
as depicted in Fig. 5, for effective time-series analysis using
LSTM networks. This technique involves moving a window
of size T across the time-series data set. As the window
slides one step at a time, it captures a segment of data, which
is crucial for the LSTM to analyze temporal patterns. The
primary objective of this method is to achieve forecasting over
a future horizon of h time steps. Speciﬁcally for this study,
Fig. 5.
Illustration of the LSTM sliding window technique.
Fig. 6.
LSTM predication for DA wind power generation.
the sliding window was set to encompass a 24-h period, with
data points collected every 15 min. This conﬁguration resulted
in T = 96 time steps within each window. Furthermore, we
utilized these observations to forecast the subsequent 24-h
period, which, given the 15-min interval between data points,
also corresponds to h = 96 time steps. By sliding this window
in overlapping increments, we ensure the LSTM network
efﬁciently learns from the temporal dependencies inherent in
the data, thereby enhancing the accuracy of our daily forecasts.
B. LSTM and RL Agents General Performance
The forecasting results for DA wind power generation is
demonstrated in Fig. 6 for a typical day. From the results,
we observe that our LSTM model achieves an RMSE of
1.235, corresponding to an 8% MAPE error. This MAPE
performance is within the acceptable error range for wind
generation prediction over a window of 24 h [49].
Furthermore, before presenting our numerical results on
LSA and PA behavior, we ﬁrst investigate the general
performance of both RL agents. In particular, Fig. 7 illustrates
the moving average of the accumulative episodic return for
both LSA and PA over the simulation episodes. Based on these
results, we observe that LSA and PA agents are able to learn
optimal actions in the ﬁrst 2000 episodes by interacting with
the environment and then maintaining a stable policy around
the optimal value. Next, we present a detailed performance
investigation for LSA and PA agents.
C. Load Serving Entity Behavior
The ultimate goal of the LSA is to learn a policy to
optimally distribute the electricity and manage the resources
among the network, while increasing its local proﬁt in (14).
At each time slot, the LSA participates in the DA and RT
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Texas at Arlington. Downloaded on June 27,2026 at 06:37:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

23994
IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL, VOL. 11, NO. 13, 1 JULY 2024
Fig. 7.
Episodic return of the LSE and PAs over the simulation episodes.
Fig. 8.
DA and RT demand deﬁciency, and the dynamic pricing scheme
generated by the LSA DDPG agent.
markets. In this article, we assume that the LSA has access to
the past wind generation data, but there is no knowledge about
the RT data. Thus, to participate in the DA and RT markets,
the LSA needs an estimation for wind capacity in the near
future (i.e., next 24 h), and thus it uses the LSTM forecasting
engine. Further, we set Cb
t = Cs
t , which means that the buy
and sell prices are equal to model the existing net-metering
scenarios. Therefore, the electricity sell price Cs
t is the only
LSA action.
Fig. 8 represents a sample day of the behavior of the LSA in
RT. As mentioned, the electricity price is the control variable
and action for the LSA. The bar plot in this ﬁgure shows
the demand deﬁciency, which can be positive or negative.
The positive/negative value for demand deﬁciency indicates
higher/lower RT demand than what was committed in the DA
market. The results demonstrate that the LSA DDPG agent
increases the electricity price, when the RT demand exceeds
the amount of energy that the LSA committed to procure in
the DA market. As a result, the LSA attempts to compensate
for the deﬁcit by procuring from distributed PV sources.
D. Prosumers’ Behavior
On the residential-user side, the PA controls the battery
charge/discharge command based on the RT price signal,
RT PV generation, and RT local consumption. The ultimate
goal of the PA is to learn a policy to minimize the total
electricity bill in (7), in the presence of PV generation and
price uncertainties. For the PA, to deal with the uncertainty
in future price, we observe the past N-step of the electricity
price. During extensive simulation, our results show that
Fig. 9.
Prosumer proﬁles of consumption, PV generation, and battery level
during a 24-h window.
Fig. 10.
Impact of weather uncertainty on the battery arbitrage.
observing the past 20 steps of electricity price is sufﬁcient to
improve the PA decision making. To deal with the PV gen-
eration uncertainty, we leverage the weather-aware framework
proposed in our previous work [47], by labeling the DA as a
{Cloudy, Sunny} day and observing the DA label in advance.
With this knowledge, our PA would be able to adjust its
decision-making behavior to improve the energy distribution
over the network with supporting the grid during peak demand
hours.
Fig. 9 illustrates the behavior of one of the prosumers in
its ﬁnal day of the simulation. This day labeled as a “cloudy
day” since a small amount of the excess PV generation is
discernible. In this day, the agent tries to charge the battery
during the off-peak hours when the price is relatively low,
especially, at the beginning of the day when there is no
excess PV power to support the grid during the peak demand
hours. The behavior of purchasing during off-peak demand
and selling back to the grid during the peak-demand hours is
also called battery arbitrage, which not only supports the grid
to decrease its peak load but also increases the proﬁt of the
prosumers.
Fig. 10 represents how considering the weather uncertainty
can affect the behavior of the PA and battery arbitrage. In the
case that the day is labeled as a “sunny day,” the PA prefers
to wait for PV excess power to charge the battery with excess
power and then discharge it during the peak demand hours.
Charging with excess power during sunny days ensures higher
beneﬁts for the prosumers, compared with purchasing at the
beginning of the day.
E. Impacts of Uncertainties
This section investigates the operation of the proposed
LSTM-DDPG framework in the presence of renewable
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Texas at Arlington. Downloaded on June 27,2026 at 06:37:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

GHASEMI et al.: COMBATING UNCERTAINTIES IN SMART GRID DECISION NETWORKS
23995
Fig. 11.
Wind generation for two consecutive days, which are the current
day and the DA generation. For the DA prediction, a range of uncertainty is
considered as well as forecasting by the LSTM module.
generation uncertainty. The results further indicate the impor-
tance of considering wind power uncertainty for decision
making in the RT and DA markets to optimize the energy
distribution in the retail market. To highlight this, we consider
two cases as follows.
1) Case 1 assumes that there is no forecasting engine in the
LSE location. In this case, one baseline approach for the
LSA is to participate in the DA market by considering
an uncertainty range for wind generation based on the
ﬁnal 24-h of real-data, likewise in [12]. In this article,
we consider an ±10% uncertainty range, meaning that
the forecasted wind generation over the next 24 h would
be within an ±10% of the generation over the past 24 h.
2) Case 2 considers an LSTM engine in the LSE, which
is fully integrated with the DDPG agent. This engine
provides the forecasting wind generation in the next
24 h. Fig. 11 shows two sample days of the data set
from two different months.
1) Impact of Uncertainty on LMP and Prosumers: The pat-
tern of wind generation is highly correlated with wind speed,
wind direction, and temperature. The differences between
intraday wind generations may be small or large, depending on
the wind farm’s geolocation. Speciﬁcally, if the pattern for the
next 24 h is similar to the previous 24 h, then obviously there
will be a slight difference between the range of uncertainty and
forecasted wind, as shown in Sample 1 in Fig. 11. Thus, there
would be slight mismatch between the RT and DA LMPs. On
the other hand, if the wind pattern changes more signiﬁcantly
for the next 24 h, the difference between uncertainty range
and forecasted wind would increase, which in turn, results in
a higher mismatch between the DA and RT LMPs, as it is
shown in Sample 2 in Fig. 11. In other words, the uncertainty
in wind patterns shift to the uncertainty in LMP prices, where
it directly affects (8) and the LSA distribution strategies.
Fig. 12 compares the performance of the two cases in a
speciﬁc day. As depicted, with uncertainty range, the LSA is
not able to dynamically change the price during the afternoon,
which directly affects the charging/discharging behaviors of
the prosumers. Thus, the prosumers are not able to use the
whole span of the battery, which leads to a smaller proﬁt in
Fig. 12.
Comparing the prosumer and LSE behavior with the LSTM engine
and the method based on uncertainty range.
Fig. 13.
PAR comparison of the proposed method with the scheme based
on the uncertainty range.
long-term. Furthermore, Fig. 12 demonstrates that the PA is
responsive to dynamic pricing by using the full capacity of the
battery (as shown in the ﬁnal graph), which in turn, results in
lower electricity bills.
2) Impact of Uncertainty on Peak-to-Average and LSE
Proﬁt: Next, we compare the PAR performance of the two
cases. PAR ratio has been used extensively in the literature as
a parameter to measure the effectiveness of the demand-side
management algorithms, and is deﬁned as follows:
PAR = T maxt∈T LD
t

t∈T LDt
.
(27)
Fig. 13 compares the PAR of the two cases. From the
results, we notice that if the LSA integrates the forecasting
engine with the DDPG algorithm and observes the predicted
wind, this helps the LSA to have a better estimation on
what the RT/DA LMPs would be and this helps the LSA to
optimally change the price to incentivize the prosumers to
participate in grid support program during peak demand hours.
This participation decreases the PAR compared with the case
without LSTM forecasting, i.e., using an uncertainty range.
Table II compares the average PAR and average proﬁt of the
ﬁnal 100 days of the simulation for different pricing scenarios
deﬁned in Fig. 14. In this article, different pricing schemes are
compared with our dynamic pricing framework. As shown in
Fig. 14, two different TOU waveforms have been considered.
One of them is from an LSE located in Kansas [50], and the
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Texas at Arlington. Downloaded on June 27,2026 at 06:37:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

23996
IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL, VOL. 11, NO. 13, 1 JULY 2024
TABLE II
LSE PROFIT AND PAR PERFORMANCE FOR
DIFFERENT PRICING SCHEMES
Fig. 14.
Different electricity price waveforms, including dynamic pricing
generated with the proposed DDPG algorithm, a ﬁxed price, and two TOU
pricing scheme.
other is a waveform used in California [51]. The ﬁxed price
waveform is deﬁned as the average of Kansas TOU. Table II
shows that our dynamic pricing based on DDPG framework
with an integrated forecasting engine results in higher proﬁts
and smaller PAR for the LSE.
VI. CONCLUSION
In this article, we studied the impact of renewable energy
resources uncertainty in both wholesale and retail markets
in smart grid. We formulated the problem as the two-
level optimization problem, and developed a framework by
combining DDPG RL and LSTM models. The RL agent
for the LSE determines the electricity price, and the PA
determines the battery charge and discharge actions. The
LSTM is implemented for time-series forecasting to address
the wind power generation uncertainty. Our simulation results
demonstrate that the proposed framework provides higher
economic beneﬁts for both LSE and prosumers. Speciﬁcally,
properly incentivizing prosumers through dynamic pricing and
leveraging the capacity of distributed battery resources result
in: 1) reduced average daily bills for prosumers; 2) enhanced
proﬁts for the LSE by decreasing the reserve generation power
demand; and 3) reduced PAR ratio. Overall, the proposed
framework along with the numerical results demonstrate that
time-series forecasting can be effectively integrated with the
RL agents for enhanced sequential decision making in the
presence of uncertainty. As a future direction, we are planning
to extend the current framework by taking into account other
important electricity market factors, such as the LSE’s bidding
strategies and the associated uncertainties.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
Any opinions, ﬁndings, and conclusions or recommenda-
tions expressed in this material are those of the author(s) and
do not necessarily reﬂect the views of the NSF.
REFERENCES
[1] “Wind energy by 2030 increasing wind energy’s contribution to U.S.
electricity supply.” nrel. Accessed: May 1, 2024. [Online]. Available:
https://www.nrel.gov/docs/fy09osti/42864.pdf
[2] “Record numbers of solar panels were shipped in the united states
during 2021.” eia. 2022. [Online]. Available: https://www.eia.gov/
todayinenergy/detail.php?id=53679
[3] Z. Zhao, Y. Liu, L. Guo, L. Bai, Z. Wang, and C. Wang, “Distribution
locational marginal pricing under uncertainty considering coordination
of distribution and wholesale markets,” IEEE Trans. Smart Grid, vol. 14,
no. 2, pp. 1590–1606, Mar. 2023.
[4] Z. Zhang and M. Wu, “Predicting real-time locational marginal prices:
A GAN-based approach,” IEEE Trans. Power Syst., vol. 37, no. 2,
pp. 1286–1296, Mar. 2022.
[5] M. Xia, H. Shao, X. Ma, and C. W. De Silva, “A stacked GRU-RNN-
based approach for predicting renewable energy and electricity load
for smart grid operation,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 17, no. 10,
pp. 7050–7059, Oct. 2021.
[6] W. Kong, Z. Y. Dong, Y. Jia, D. J. Hill, Y. Xu, and Y. Zhang,
“Short-term residential load forecasting based on LSTM recurrent neural
network,” IEEE Trans. Smart Grid, vol. 10, no. 1, pp. 841–851, Jan.
2019.
[7] H. Jahangir, H. Tayarani, S. S. Gougheri, M. A. Golkar, A. Ahmadian,
and A. Elkamel, “Deep learning-based forecasting approach in smart
grids with microclustering and bidirectional LSTM network,” IEEE
Trans. Ind. Electron., vol. 68, no. 9, pp. 8298–8309, Sep. 2021.
[8] X. Gao, K. W. Chan, S. Xia, X. Zhang, K. Zhang, and J. Zhou, “A
multiagent competitive bidding strategy in a pool-based electricity mar-
ket with price-maker participants of WPPs and EV aggregators,” IEEE
Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 17, no. 11, pp. 7256–7268, Nov. 2021.
[9] H. Zhang et al., “Robust deep reinforcement learning against adversarial
perturbations on state observations,” in Proc. 34th Adv. Neural Inf.
Process. Syst., 2020, pp. 21024–21037.
[10] J. Yu, C. Gehring, F. Schäfer, and A. Anandkumar, “Robust reinforce-
ment learning: A constrained game-theoretic approach,” in Proc. Learn.
Dyn. Control, 2021, pp. 1242–1254.
[11] S. He, S. Han, S. Su, S. Han, S. Zou, and F. Miao, “Robust multi-
agent reinforcement learning with state uncertainty,” Trans. Mach.
Learn. Res., 2023. [Online]. Available: https://openreview.net/forum?id=
CqTkapZ6H9
[12] V.-H. Bui, A. Hussain, and H.-M. Kim, “Double deep Q-learning-
based distributed operation of battery energy storage system considering
uncertainties,” IEEE Trans. Smart Grid, vol. 11, no. 1, pp. 457–469,
Jan. 2020.
[13] H.
Li,
Z.
Wan,
and
H.
He,
“Real-time
residential
demand
response,” IEEE Trans. Smart Grid, vol. 11, no. 5, pp. 4144–4154,
Sep. 2020.
[14] E. Samadi, A. Badri, and R. Ebrahimpour, “Decentralized multi-
agent based energy management of microgrid using reinforcement
learning,” Int. J. Elect. Power Energy Syst., vol. 122, Nov. 2020,
Art. no. 106211.
[15] H. Xiao, X. Pu, W. Pei, L. Ma, and T. Ma, “A novel energy management
method for networked multi-energy microgrids based on improved
DQN,” IEEE Trans. Smart Grid, vol. 14, no. 6, pp. 4912–4926,
Nov. 2023.
[16] J. Qi, L. Lei, K. Zheng, S. X. Yang, and X. Shen, “Optimal scheduling
in IoT-driven smart isolated microgrids based on deep reinforcement
learning,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 10, no. 18, pp. 16284–16299,
Sep. 2023.
[17] C. Guo, X. Wang, Y. Zheng, and F. Zhang, “Real-time optimal energy
management of microgrid with uncertainties based on deep reinforce-
ment learning,” Energy, vol. 238, Jan. 2022, Art. no. 121873.
[18] Y. Liang, C. Guo, Z. Ding, and H. Hua, “Agent-based modeling in elec-
tricity market using deep deterministic policy gradient algorithm,” IEEE
Trans. Power Syst., vol. 35, no. 6, pp. 4180–4192, Nov. 2020.
[19] E. Foruzan, L.-K. Soh, and S. Asgarpoor, “Reinforcement learn-
ing
approach
for
optimal
distributed
energy
management
in
a
microgrid,” IEEE Trans. Power Syst., vol. 33, no. 5, pp. 5749–5758,
Sep. 2018.
[20] A. Dolatabadi, H. Abdeltawab, and Y. A.-R. I. Mohamed, “A novel
model-free deep reinforcement learning framework for energy manage-
ment of a PV integrated energy hub,” IEEE Trans. Power Syst., vol. 38,
no. 5, pp. 4840–4852, Sep. 2023.
[21] L. Lei, Y. Tan, G. Dahlenburg, W. Xiang, and K. Zheng, “Dynamic
energy dispatch based on deep reinforcement learning in IoT-driven
smart isolated microgrids,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 8, no. 10,
pp. 7938–7953, May 2021.
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Texas at Arlington. Downloaded on June 27,2026 at 06:37:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

GHASEMI et al.: COMBATING UNCERTAINTIES IN SMART GRID DECISION NETWORKS
23997
[22] Z. Zhu, K. W. Chan, S. Xia, and S. Bu, “Optimal bi-level bidding
and dispatching strategy between active distribution network and virtual
alliances using distributed robust multi-agent deep reinforcement learn-
ing,” IEEE Trans. Smart Grid, vol. 13, no. 4, pp. 2833–2843, Jul. 2022.
[23] A. A. Amer, K. Shaban, and A. M. Massoud, “DRL-HEMS: Deep
reinforcement learning agent for demand response in home energy
management systems considering customers and operators perspec-
tives,” IEEE Trans. Smart Grid, vol. 14, no. 1, pp. 239–250, Jan. 2023.
[24] R. Lu, S. H. Hong, and M. Yu, “Demand response for home
energy management using reinforcement learning and artiﬁcial neural
network,” IEEE Trans. Smart Grid, vol. 10, no. 6, pp. 6629–6639,
Nov. 2019.
[25] L. Xiong et al., “A two-level energy management strategy for
multi-microgrid systems with interval prediction and reinforcement
learning,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers, vol. 69, no. 4,
pp. 1788–1799, Apr. 2022.
[26] X. Xu, Y. Jia, Y. Xu, Z. Xu, S. Chai, and C. S. Lai, “A multi-
agent reinforcement learning-based data-driven method for home energy
management,” IEEE Trans. Smart Grid, vol. 11, no. 4, pp. 3201–3211,
Jul. 2020.
[27] J. Cao, D. Harrold, Z. Fan, T. Morstyn, D. Healey, and K. Li, “Deep
reinforcement learning-based energy storage arbitrage with accurate
lithium-ion battery degradation model,” IEEE Trans. Smart Grid, vol. 11,
no. 5, pp. 4513–4521, Sep. 2020.
[28] Z. Wan, H. Li, H. He, and D. Prokhorov, “Model-free real-time EV
charging scheduling based on deep reinforcement learning,” IEEE Trans.
Smart Grid, vol. 10, no. 5, pp. 5246–5257, Sep. 2019.
[29] F. Zhang, Q. Yang, and D. An, “CDDPG: A deep-reinforcement-
learning-based approach for electric vehicle charging control,” IEEE
Internet Things J., vol. 8, no. 5, pp. 3075–3087, Mar. 2021.
[30] L.
Xiong
et
al.,
“Meta-reinforcement
learning-based
transferable
scheduling strategy for energy management,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst.
I, Reg. Papers, vol. 70, no. 4, pp. 1685–1695, Apr. 2023.
[31] Y. Ye, H. Wang, P. Chen, Y. Tang, and G. Strbac, “Safe deep reinforce-
ment learning for microgrid energy management in distribution networks
with leveraged spatial–temporal perception,” IEEE Trans. Smart Grid,
vol. 14, no. 5, pp. 3759–3775, Sep. 2023.
[32] D. A. Khan, A. Arshad, M. Lehtonen, and K. Mahmoud, “Combined DR
pricing and voltage control using reinforcement learning based multi-
agents and load forecasting,” IEEE Access, vol. 10, pp. 130839–130849,
2022.
[33] A. Ghasempour, “Internet of Things in smart grid: Architecture, appli-
cations, services, key technologies, and challenges,” Inventions, vol. 4,
no. 1, p. 22, 2019.
[34] C. Wan, J. Zhao, Y. Song, Z. Xu, J. Lin, and Z. Hu, “Photovoltaic and
solar power forecasting for smart grid energy management,” CSEE J.
Power Energy Syst., vol. 1, no. 4, pp. 38–46, Dec. 2015.
[35] D. Kaur, S. N. Islam, M. A. Mahmud, M. E. Haque, and Z. Y. Dong,
“Energy forecasting in smart grid systems: A review of the state-of-the-
art techniques,” 2022, arXiv:2011.12598.
[36] A. Bukharin et al., “Robust multi-agent reinforcement learning via
adversarial Regularization: Theoretical foundation and stable algo-
rithms,” 2023, arXiv:2310.10810.
[37] S. Li et al., “MIR2: Towards provably robust multi-agent reinforcement
learning by mutual information regularization,” 2023, arXiv:2310.09833.
[38] I. Rasheed, F. Hu, and L. Zhang, “Deep reinforcement learning approach
for autonomous vehicle systems for maintaining security and safety
using LSTM-GAN,” Veh. Commun., vol. 26, Dec. 2020, Art. no. 100266.
[39] Q. Hong, F. Meng, J. Liu, and R. Bo, “A bilevel game-theoretic decision-
making framework for strategic retailers in both local and wholesale
electricity markets,” Appl. Energy, vol. 330, Jan. 2023, Art. no. 120311.
[40] A. Ravi, L. Bai, V. Cecchi, and F. Ding, “Stochastic strategic partic-
ipation of active distribution networks with high-penetration DERs in
wholesale electricity markets,” IEEE Trans. Smart Grid, vol. 14, no. 2,
pp. 1515–1527, Mar. 2023.
[41] O. Homaee, A. Najaﬁ, M. Jasinski, G. Tsaousoglou, and Z. Leonowicz,
“Coordination of Neighboring active distribution networks under
electricity price uncertainty using distributed robust bi-level program-
ming,” IEEE Trans. Sustain. Energy, vol. 14, no. 1, pp. 325–338,
Jan. 2023.
[42] S. Hochreiter and J. Schmidhuber, “Long short-term memory,” Neural
Comput., vol. 9, no. 8, pp. 1735–1780, 1997.
[43] D. Silver, G. Lever, N. Heess, T. Degris, D. Wierstra, and M. Riedmiller,
“Deterministic policy gradient algorithms,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach.
Learn., 2014, pp. 387–395.
[44] S. Santurkar, D. Tsipras, A. Ilyas, and A. Madry, “How does batch
normalization help optimization?” in Proc. 32nd Adv. Neural Inf.
Process. Syst., 2018, pp. 1–11.
[45] W. Ongsakul and V. N. Dieu, Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Power System
Optimization. Boca Raton, FL, USA: Crc Press, 2013.
[46] (Kaggle
Data
Sci.
Co.,
San
Francisco,
CA,
USA).
Two-and-
Half Years Data for a Windmill. Jan. 2018. [Online]. Available:
https://www.kaggle.com/theforcecoder/wind-power-forecasting
[47] A. Shojaeighadikolaei, A. Ghasemi, A. G. Bardas, R. Ahmadi, and
M. Hashemi, “Weather-aware data-driven microgrid energy management
using deep reinforcement learning,” in Proc. North Am. Power Symp.
(NAPS), 2021, pp. 1–6.
[48] X. Fang, F. Li, Y. Wei, and H. Cui, “Strategic scheduling of energy stor-
age for load serving entities in locational marginal pricing market,” IET
Gener., Transm. Distrib., vol. 10, no. 5, pp. 1258–1267, 2016.
[49] O. Abedinia, M. Lotﬁ, M. Bagheri, B. Sobhani, M. Shaﬁe-Khah, and
J. P. S. Catalão, “Improved EMD-based complex prediction model for
wind power forecasting,” IEEE Trans. Sustain. Energy, vol. 11, no. 4,
pp. 2790–2802, Oct. 2020.
[50] (Evergy Electr. Serv. Co., Kansas, MO, USA). Time-of-Use Pricing.
Accessed: May 1, 2024. [Online]. Available: https://www.evergy.
com/-/media/documents/billing/kansas-central/residential/time-of-
use-12212023.pdf
[51] (Southern California Edison Co., Rosemead, CA, USA). Time-of-
Use Pricing. [Online]. Available: https://www.sce.com/residential/rates/
Time-Of-Use-Residential-Rate-Plans
Arman Ghasemi received the B.S. degree in elec-
trical engineering from Iran University of Science
and Technology, Tehran, Iran, in 2012, and the M.S.
degree in electrical engineering from the University
of Tehran, Tehran, in 2016. He is currently pursuing
the Ph.D. degree in electrical and computer engi-
neering with the University of Kansas, Lawrence,
KS, USA.
His research focuses on power systems, energy
market, renewable energy and their applications in
the power grid and systems, machine learning, and
time-series forecasting.
Amin Shojaeighadikolaei received the B.S. and
M.S. degrees from Iran University of Science and
Technology, Tehran, Iran, in 2012 and 2015, respec-
tively. He is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree
with the Department of Electrical Engineering and
Computer Science, University of Kansas, Lawrence,
KS, USA.
During his Ph.D. journey, he gained valuable
internship experience as a Power System Data
Scientist with Electric Power Engineers Company
in 2022 and 2023. His research interests focus on
machine learning, reinforcement learning, and scalable multiagent networks
for cyber–physical systems.
Morteza Hashemi (Senior Member, IEEE) received
the B.S. degree from the Sharif University of
Technology, Tehran, Iran, in 2011, and the M.Sc. and
Ph.D. degrees in electrical engineering from Boston
University, Boston, MA, USA, in 2013 and 2015,
respectively.
He is an Assistant Professor with the Department
of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science,
University of Kansas (KU), Lawrence, KS, USA.
Before joining KU in 2019, he was a Postdoctoral
Researcher and a Senior Lecturer with The Ohio
State University, Columbus, OH, USA. His research interests span the areas
of wireless communications, information systems, real-time data networking,
and networked cyber–physical systems.
Dr. Hashemi received the Boston University Provost’s Award in 2014 for
excellence in research. He was the recipient of the Bellows Scholar Award
from the University of Kansas in 2021 and 2022.
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Texas at Arlington. Downloaded on June 27,2026 at 06:37:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
