5420
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SMART GRID, VOL. 12, NO. 6, NOVEMBER 2021
Robust Regional Coordination of Inverter-Based
Volt/Var Control via Multi-Agent Deep
Reinforcement Learning
Hangyue Liu
, Graduate Student Member, IEEE, Cuo Zhang
, Member, IEEE, Qingmian Chai
,
Ke Meng, Member, IEEE, Qinglai Guo
, Senior Member, IEEE,
and Zhao Yang Dong
, Fellow, IEEE
Abstract—Inverter-based Volt/Var control (VVC) methods can
effectively address issues of voltage deviations and constraint
violations, as well as reduce network power losses in active distri-
bution networks. Conventional VVC mainly relies on rule-based,
mathematical, or heuristic methods. However, these methods can
be inefﬁcient or even infeasible for large-scale systems, especially
when operational uncertainties are considered at both spatial
and temporal scales. To this end, ﬁrstly, this paper formulates
a multi-region coordinated VVC optimization problem to simul-
taneously minimize bus voltage deviations and network power
losses. Furthermore, with the problem being formulated as a par-
tially observable Markov Game, a multi-agent deep deterministic
policy gradient (MADDPG) algorithm is modiﬁed to solve this
problem. Each region, which is a sub-network with a control cen-
ter, is modeled as an agent and learns to optimize inverter reactive
power output setpoints through exploration in virtual environ-
ment and improved neural network training procedure. Spatial
and temporal uncertainties of photovoltaic power generation
and loads are modeled by stochastic programming as scenar-
ios in the MADDPG algorithm. This algorithm can address the
uncertainties to guarantee solution robustness. Thus, this paper
eventually proposes a robust regionally coordinated VVC method,
and numerical simulations indicate high computing efﬁciency and
robust optimum.
Index Terms—Active distribution network, deep reinforcement
learning, regional coordination, uncertainty, Volt/Var control.
Manuscript received December 16, 2020; revised April 15, 2021 and June
17, 2021; accepted July 30, 2021. Date of publication August 11, 2021;
date of current version October 21, 2021. This work was supported in
part by the ARC Research Hub for Integrated Energy Storage Solutions
under Grant IH180100020; in part by the UNSW Digital Grid Futures
Institute; and in part by the UNSW-Tsinghua Collaborative Research Fund—
Digital Grids. The work of Hangyue Liu and Qingmian Chai was supported
by the Australian Government Research Training Program Scholarship.
Paper no. TSG-01869-2020. (Corresponding author: Cuo Zhang.)
Hangyue
Liu,
Cuo
Zhang,
Qingmian
Chai,
Ke
Meng,
and
Zhao Yang Dong
are
with
the
School
of
Electrical
Engineering
and
Telecommunications, University of New South Wales, Sydney, NSW 2052,
Australia
(e-mail:
hangyue.liu@unsw.edu.au;
cuo.zhang@unsw.edu.au;
chaiqm1986@gmail.com; ke.meng@unsw.edu.au; zydong@ieee.org).
Qinglai
Guo
is
with
the
Department
of
Electrical
Engineering,
Tsinghua
University,
Beijing
100084,
China
(e-mail:
guoqinglai@tsinghua.edu.cn).
Color versions of one or more ﬁgures in this article are available at
https://doi.org/10.1109/TSG.2021.3104139.
Digital Object Identiﬁer 10.1109/TSG.2021.3104139
NOMENCLATURE
Volt/Var Control
M, m
Set/Index of sub-networks.
Nm, i, j
Set/Index of nodes in sub-network m.
Bm, ij
Set/Index of branches in sub-network m.
T, t
Set/Index of operation timestep.
U, u
Set/Index
of
temporal
uncertainty
scenarios.
δ
Inverter reactive power capacity factor.
vi, ϑi
Voltage magnitude/angle on bus i.
rij, xij, Gij, Bij
Resistance/Reactance/Conductance/
Susceptance of branch from bus i to
bus j.
SPV
i
Installed photovoltaic capacity on bus i.
PPV/d
i,max, QPV/d
i,max
Maximum active/reactive power genera-
tion/demand on bus i.
PMPP/d
i,ζ
/PMPP/d
i,ζ
,
Q
d
i,ζ/Qd
i,ζ
Spatial uncertainty upper/lower bound of
inverter maximum power point/active and
reactive power demand on bus i.
PMPP/d
i,τ
/PMPP/d
i,τ
,
Q
d
i,τ/Qd
i,τ
Temporal
uncertainty
upper/lower
bound
of
inverter
maximum
power
point/active and reactive power demand
on bus i.
pd
i,t, qd
i,t
Active/Reactive power demand.
pPV
i,t , qPV
i,t
Active/Reactive power generation.
pMPP
i,t
Maximum PV active power at time t.
ploss
ij,t
Active power loss on branch ij at time t.
ω
Weighting
factor
for
multi-objective
programming.
V/loss
m,t
Normalized
average
voltage
devia-
tion/network power loss in sub-network
m at time t. (In stochastic programming,
sum of normalized values under all the
scenarios.)
V/loss
m,t,u
Normalized
average
voltage
devi-
ation/network
power
loss
under
scenario u.
ϖ viol
m,t
Voltage
violations
in
sub-network
m
at time t. (In stochastic programming,
sum of voltage violations under all the
scenarios.)
1949-3053 c⃝2021 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Texas at Arlington. Downloaded on June 27,2026 at 06:10:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

LIU et al.: ROBUST REGIONAL COORDINATION OF INVERTER-BASED Volt/Var CONTROL
5421
ϖ viol
m,t,u
Voltage violations under scenario u.
ξu
Occurrence probability of scenario u.
Deep Reinforcement Learning
Am, Om, O′
m
Action/Observation/Next
Observation
space of agent m.
S/S′
Whole system state/next state space.
am, a′
m
Action/Next action taken by agent m.
a, a′
Action/Next action taken by all agents.
om, o′
m
Observation/Next observation by agent m.
s, s′
Observation/Next
observation
by
all
agents.
m, r
Reward of agent m / all agents.
γ
Reward discount factor.
πm(om)
Policy network of agent m, input om,
output am, network parameter θπm.
Qm(s, a)
Q network of agent m, input s and a,
output Qm, network parameterθQm.
π′
m(o′
m)
Target policy network of agent m, input
o′
m, output a′
m, network parameterθπ′
m.
Q′
m(s′, a′)
Target Q network of agent m, input s′ and
a′, output Q′
m, network parameterθQ′
m.
βπ, βQ
Learning rate of policy/Q networks.
dom, dam
Dimension of observation/action space
for agent m.
I. INTRODUCTION
W
ITH signiﬁcantly increasing photovoltaic (PV) penetra-
tion in active distribution networks (ADNs), a variety
of Volt/Var control (VVC) methods has been developed to
address voltage regulation issues and to reduce network
power losses [1]. Amongst these methods, inverter-based
VVC has been widely investigated, given its increasing avail-
ability, ﬂexibility of Var compensation, and fast responding
speed with advanced power electronics technologies. The
inverter-based VVC can also be designed in collaboration
with other VVC devices like on-load/under-load tap chang-
ers (OLTCs/ULTCs) and capacitor banks (CBs) at different
timescales [2]–[4].
Inverter-based VVC optimization problems can be solved
on a central level and such centralized optimization meth-
ods [5] are developed. However, centralized methods require
complicated communication networks, and they often suf-
fer from privacy, complexity, and scalability issues, etc.
Hence, distributed and decentralized VVC schemes as well
as hybrid schemes have been growingly studied [6]. In [7]
and [8], local voltage control strategies of distributed gen-
eration (DG) units based on Q −V droop control curves
and a model predictive control framework are developed,
showing good efﬁciency. In [9] and [10], distributed VVC
methods based on network partitions are developed, where
each sub-network conducts optimization according to its
own information and the data exchanged with neighbor sub-
networks. In [11], a two-stage dynamic optimal power ﬂow
model for multiple microgrids is developed, where a distri-
butionally robust optimization method is applied to address
uncertainties with an ambiguity set. Distributionally robust
optimization is advanced in dealing with distributional ambi-
guity and improving out-of-sample performance [12]. Authors
in [13] propose a hierarchically-coordinated VVC structure
combining centralized control dispatching reactive power set-
points as well as droop functions for PV inverters, and
decentralized droop control that responds to local voltage vari-
ations during each central dispatch period. Similarly, a dual
time-scale coordination of robust reactive power optimization
and voltage control method is proposed in [3], working with
ULTCs and CBs on a slow timescale, DG units and static Var
compensators (SVCs) on a fast timescale. In [4], a three-stage
VVC method is proposed with the ﬁrst stage coordinating
OLTC and CBs, the second stage dispatching inverter reactive
power setpoints, and the third stage implementing decentral-
ized droop control. In most of the above literature, VVC
optimization problems are formulated as mathematical prob-
lems such as quadratic programming (QP) or second-order
cone programming (SOCP) problems, then solved mathe-
matically. It is worth noting that although some mathematic
hybrid control methods have been proposed, these methods
suffer from heavy computation burdens when systems become
large and complex, or when uncertainties are considered [14].
In particular, in some multi-timescale VVC methods such
as [2], [15], the fast time-scale is still on a 15-minute basis,
which fails to fulﬁll requirements of fast and robust control
in ADNs.
There have been many attempts to improve the compu-
tational efﬁciency, including applications of reinforcement
learning (RL) algorithms in solving power system opera-
tion optimization problems, e.g., [16], [17]. However, the
conventional RL algorithms suffer from scalability issues
and the ‘curse of dimensionality’ for both state and action
spaces [18]. Consequently, system model accuracy is often
sacriﬁced, or system state and action spaces are usually sim-
pliﬁed and discretized. To overcome these issues, and with
advancements in deep (D-) RL in the recent decade, many
DRL-based algorithms have been developed to solve VVC
problems. In [19], discrete voltage setpoints are optimized
with a deep Q network (DQN) algorithm for a VVC model
including switching shunt elements, OLTC tap ratios, and gen-
erator terminal voltage setpoints in a transmission system.
Similarly, [20] applies a batch reinforcement learning algo-
rithm for optimizing OLTC tap ratio settings. A constrained
soft actor-critic algorithm has been proposed in [21], to solve
a VVC problem containing OLTCs, CBs, and voltage regula-
tors. Reference [22] proposes a two-timescale VVC method,
in which the slow responsive CB switching control is based on
DQN, while the fast responsive inverter reactive power con-
trol is achieved with the SOCP algorithm. Moreover, [23]
proposes an autonomous voltage control method based on
DQN for OLTC tap ratios and switching shunt elements, as
well as a deep deterministic policy gradient (DDPG) algo-
rithm for voltage setpoints of distributed generators. However,
most of the above DRL-based methods are applied for cen-
tralized control frameworks, which are computationally expen-
sive and suffer from privacy issues. Recently, [24] applies
a multi-agent DDPG (MADDPG) algorithm [25] to solve
fully decentralized inverter-based VVC, with each inverter
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Texas at Arlington. Downloaded on June 27,2026 at 06:10:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

5422
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SMART GRID, VOL. 12, NO. 6, NOVEMBER 2021
modeled as an agent. The algorithm outperforms conven-
tional programming based centralized and decentralized droop
control methods. Further, an attention enabled MADDPG algo-
rithm for decentralized inverter-based VVC has been proposed
in [26], where a multi-agent twin delayed DDPG algorithm
(MATD3) is developed for voltage regulation with unsuper-
vised clustering based network partition. The simulations in
this wok indicate advances over conventional centralized con-
trol methods. The main advantages of applying an MADDPG
algorithm is the improved computational efﬁciency with deep
neural networks that can make decisions in milliseconds,
regardless scales of distribution systems and complexity of
operating conditions. Thus, it is scalable to solve decen-
tralized VVC problems online for large-scale distribution
networks, compared with conventional mathematical method-
ologies and RL-based methodologies. Besides, unlike con-
ventional mathematical methodologies that require accurately
known models, the MADDPG algorithm is based on model-
free Markov Game. Therefore, the MADDPG algorithm has
higher applicability, especially when accurate models are not
available.
Nonetheless, temporal intermittencies and spatial variations
of renewable power generation and loads are still not fully
considered or addressed in the existing methods. Furthermore,
most of the above works do not consider the usage of
historical expert operation data or equivalent which could
further improve the performance of DRL agents in the train-
ing process. Considering the above unsolved issues, this
paper aims to achieve real-time decision making with an
improved DRL algorithm, and robustly regulate voltages and
minimize network power losses under spatial and tempo-
ral uncertainties of renewable power generation and loads.
The main contributions of this paper are summarized as
follows.
1) A robust regionally coordinated (RRC-) VVC method
is proposed and formulated into a partially observable
Markov Game (POMG) problem. Then, a MADDPG
algorithm is applied to solve the problem, with a frame-
work of centralized training and decentralized execution
for each sub-network in an ADN.
2) Due to locational variations and real-time intermitten-
cies of renewable power generation and loads, spa-
tial and temporal uncertainties are fully considered
and addressed in the proposed RRC-VVC method. To
achieve robust solutions against uncertainties, a stochas-
tic programming method is applied in the proposed
MADDPG algorithm.
3) The training performance is enhanced, in terms of the
solution optimality, by applying behavior cloning, expert
target Q value estimation, and prioritized experience
replay.
II. REGIONALLY COORDINATED VVC
In this section, a multi-objective regionally coordinated
VVC optimization model is proposed considering a PV
inverter dispatch model as well as spatial and temporal
uncertainties.
Fig. 1.
Framework of regionally coordinated VVC.
A. Regionally Coordinated Framework
As aforementioned, the conventional centralized frame-
work of VVC suffers from communication and computation
burdens, privacy issues, etc. To this end, this work pro-
poses a regionally coordinated VVC framework which is
illustrated in Fig. 1. This framework is characterized by cen-
tralized training and decentralized execution. In detail, the
proposed framework partitions a distribution network of N
buses into M sub-networks. It is worth mentioning that the
sub-networks remain interconnected with power ﬂows cou-
pled, and the power ﬂow model presented in Section II-E
works for the whole system. Then controllers of each sub-
network are trained with system-wide information in a cen-
tralized manner. During each operation period, the trained
controllers implement VVC with local measurements within
their corresponding sub-networks.
B. Inverter Dispatch Model
In the proposed framework, a practical inverter dispatch
model with the Var-priority operation mode [27] is adopted. In
this mode, inverters supply reactive power as the priority when
required, so that active power will be curtailed if the reac-
tive power compensation capacity is insufﬁcient. Furthermore,
the reactive power output of each inverter is also limited to
a preset proportion of its apparent power capacity, with the
positive value representing injecting reactive power to the grid,
and a negative one denoting absorbing reactive power from
the grid. Therefore, the following inverter dispatch model is
formulated and used as constraints.

pPV
i,t
2 +

qPV
i,t
2 ≤

SPV
i
2,
(1)
0 ≤pPV
i,t ≤pMPP
i,t
,
(2)
−δ SPV
i
≤qPV
i,t ≤δ SPV
i
.
(3)
C. Multi-Objective Programming
Aiming to improve power quality for end-users and allow
utilities to reduce operation and maintenance costs, two
VVC objectives are considered for each sub-network, i.e.,
minimization of bus voltage deviations and network power
losses. The objective function for sub-network m at time t can
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Texas at Arlington. Downloaded on June 27,2026 at 06:10:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

LIU et al.: ROBUST REGIONAL COORDINATION OF INVERTER-BASED Volt/Var CONTROL
5423
be written as,
min

f V
m,t , f loss
m,t

.
(4)
An average voltage deviation index f V
m,t for sub-network m
is deﬁned as,
f V
m,t =

i∈Nm
vi,t −Vref

Nm
,
∀i, t,
(5)
where Vref denotes the reference bus voltage.
Power loss of each branch is derived with bus voltages
and branch impedance, and the total power loss f loss
m,t
of
sub-network m is formulated as,
f loss
m,t =

(ij)∈Bm
ploss
ij,t = Re(

(ij)∈Bm

vi,t −vj,t
2
rij −jxij
),
∀ij, t,
(6)
where Re means taking the real part of a complex number.
As the above two objectives are conﬂicting [28], a classic
weighted sum algorithm [29] is deployed to make a trade-
off between them. This algorithm converts the multi-objective
function to an equivalent single-objective one with weighting
factors. To deal with different scales of these two objec-
tives, Utopian and Nadir points are used to normalize these
objectives as V
m,t and loss
m,t , respectively. Hence, a weighted
sum of the normalized objectives is formulated below for
sub-network m,
min(ωV
m,t + (1 −ω)loss
m,t ),
(7)
where ω is a user-deﬁned weighting factor that trades-off
between voltage deviations and network power losses.
D. Spatial and Temporal Uncertainties
Given the locational variations of renewable power gener-
ation and loads, as well as the short-term intermittencies and
ﬂuctuations, spatial and temporal uncertainties are considered
and addressed in this paper to ensure operating constraints.
System operating conditions, such as power injections vary
geographically across the entire ADN. These variations are
depending on uncertain inverter operating status, solar irradi-
ance, end-user behaviors, etc. Hence, the spatial uncertainty
model is ﬁrstly established. This model is based on predicted
intervals of PV power generation and loads. In particular,
pMPP
i,t0 , pd
i,t0, and qd
i,t0 indicate possible uncertainty realizations
at t0, and they are constrained within the predicted intervals as,
PMPP/d
i,ζ
≤pMPP/d
i,t0
≤PMPP/d
i,ζ
,
∀i,
(8)
Qd
i,ζ ≤qd
i,t0 ≤Q
d
i,ζ,
∀i.
(9)
With the above spatial uncertainty model, optimization takes
place at each decision timestep. However, as illustrated in
Fig. 2, between two consecutive timesteps, there are commu-
nication delays from state measurement to state reception by
controllers, and from control signal dispatch to signal reception
by inverters. In addition, inverter response time also causes
a delay. During these delays, the system operating conditions
may change, including PV power generation and loads. Hence,
to eliminate impacts of these delays, temporal uncertainties at
Fig. 2.
Temporal uncertainties due to delays and intermittency.
each decision timestep are fully considered in this paper and
formulated as,
PMPP/d
i,τ
≤pMPP/d
i,t
≤PMPP/d
i,τ
,
∀i, t ̸= t0,
(10)
Qd
i,τ ≤qd
i,t ≤Q
d
i,τ,
∀i, t ̸= t0.
(11)
The intervals in this temporal uncertainty model vary tempo-
rally and are related to the real-time measurements at t.
E. Regionally Coordinated VVC Optimization Model
With the above models, an optimization problem for sub-
network m can be formulated as follows.
min
pPV
i,t ,qPV
i,t

t∈T
(ωV
m,t + (1 −ω)loss
m,t + λϖ viol
m,t )
(12)
s.t. (1)−(3), (5)−(6), (8)−(11),
ϖ viol
m,t =

i∈Nm
max{(vi,t −vi,max), 0, (vi,min −vi,t)},
(13)
pPV
i,t −pd
i,t =

j∈Nm
vi,t
vj,t

Gijcos

ϑi,t −ϑj,t

+Bijsin

ϑi,t −ϑj,t
 	
,
∀i,
(14)
qPV
i,t −qd
i,t =

j∈Nm
vi,t
vj,t

Gijsin

ϑi,t −ϑj,t

−Bijcos

ϑi,t −ϑj,t
 	
,
∀i.
(15)
Objective function (12), containing calculation Eq. (5)
and (6), aims to minimize bus voltage deviations and network
power losses by taking voltage constraint violations as
a penalty. Here, a user-deﬁned penalty factor λ is used to min-
imize this penalty, so that voltage violations can be reduced
to the maximum extent. Equation (13) calculates the bus volt-
age deviations from the limits if any, and regards them as
voltage violations for the penalty calculation in (12). The AC
power ﬂow model – as described by Eq. (14) and (15), is uti-
lized to obtain power ﬂow results, and it can be solved by the
Newton-Raphson method.
III. DATA-DRIVEN RRC-VVC
In this section, ﬁrstly, a multi-agent Markov decision pro-
cess (MDP) model – POMG is utilized to reformulate the
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Texas at Arlington. Downloaded on June 27,2026 at 06:10:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

5424
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SMART GRID, VOL. 12, NO. 6, NOVEMBER 2021
proposed optimization problem of the regionally coordinated
VVC. Secondly, a stochastic programming model is involved
in the POMG model to address the spatial and temporal uncer-
tainties. Then, an improved MADDPG algorithm is developed
with expert operation data and a prioritized experience replay,
and it is applied to solve the POMG-formulated optimization
problem. Thus, a data-driven RRC-VVC method against the
spatial and temporal uncertainties is proposed.
A. POMG Formulation
Different from the conventional MDP model that has four
tuples for only one agent, i.e., state space, action space, reward
function, and transition function {S, A, R, P}, in a POMG
model of M agents, there are observation spaces O1, . . . , OM
and action spaces A1, . . . , AM. With observation om retrieved
from current state S in the environment, each agent m chooses
action am with its policy πm. The next state S′ is achieved after
actions of all agents are taken, according to the transition func-
tion T: S × A1 × . . . × AM →S′ that denotes the probability
matrix from a state S to a next state S′ with given actions.
Each agent then obtains its reward
m and updated observa-
tion o′
m accordingly. The aim of each agent is to maximize its
expected return over time horizon T by,
Rm =

t∈T
γ trm,t,
(16)
where γ is the reward discount factor that trades-off between
current reward and future return.
In a general RL framework, an agent’s performance is
measured by the state value function Vπ(s) or the state-
action value function Qπ(s, a), which are functions of the
expected, discounted, and accumulated return on the current
state or state-action pair [18]. The state-action value function
is deﬁned as,
Qπ(s, a) = Eπ{Rt | st = s, at = a}
= Eπ

T−t

k=0
γ krt+k
 st = s, at = a

.
(17)
B. Formulation Into POMG
The regionally coordinated VVC optimization problem
proposed
in
Section
II
can
be
reformulated
into
a POMG model.
In this formulation, the controller of each sub-network is
modeled as an agent that interacts with the environment.
Observation space Om covers the dynamic information in
sub-network m including vi,t, pd
i,t, qd
i,t, and pMPP
i,t
.
Action space Am includes the continuous reactive power
control decisions for each inverter in sub-network m, qPV
i,t .
Reward function
m is modeled based on the proposed
objective function (12). Since the reward is to be maximized
in the POMG model, the reward function is modeled as,
m,t = −(ωV
m,t + (1 −ω)loss
m,t + λϖ viol
m,t ).
(18)
The transition function T represents the system dynamics
and predicts the next state after agents taking actions at a state.
In this VVC work, the transition function directly corresponds
to the system operating constraints given in Section II-E.
For DRL algorithms that are based on deterministic poli-
cies such as MADDPG, the state-action value function given
in (17) can be decomposed into the Bellman equation [18] as,
Qπ∗(s, a) = r

s, a, s′
+ γ max
a′ Qπ∗(s′, a′),
(19)
where π∗represents the optimal policy.
C. Stochastic Programming
In this paper, stochastic programming is deployed to address
the spatial and temporal uncertainties of PV power generation
and loads.
Firstly, before each operation period, spatial uncertainty sce-
narios are randomly generated within the predicted intervals
given in Eq. (8) and (9) via Monte Carlo sampling.
Secondly, within each operation period, temporal uncer-
tainty scenarios are generated via Monte Carlo sampling. It is
worth noting that the delays are taken into account by using the
intervals of temporal uncertainties given in Eq. (10) and (11).
In each temporal uncertainty scenario, voltage deviations and
network power losses can be calculated, so that the two objec-
tives can be modiﬁed with the scenario occurrence probability.
Considering U temporal uncertainty scenarios at each deci-
sion timestep, and ξu as the occurrence probability of scenario
u ∈U, the normalized objectives can be reformulated as,
V/loss
m,t
=

u∈U
ξuV/loss
m,t,u
.
(20)
In addition, to ensure operation robustness by keeping all
the operating constraints under the uncertainties, Eq. (13)
is modiﬁed by summing up the voltage constraint violation
occurrences under all the scenarios as,
ϖ viol
m,t =

u∈U
ϖ viol
m,t,u.
(21)
In this work, temporal uncertainty realization scenarios are
generated in a time sequence for the temporal correlation.
In each sequence of temporal uncertainty scenarios, the later
scenario is generated according to the previous one within real-
time boundaries. Thus, the temporal correlation is considered
and solved by the proposed MADDPG method. On the other
hand, the spatial correlation can also be involved when neces-
sary by applying well-developed scenario sampling methods
with joint distribution, such as [30].
D. Proposed MADDPG Algorithm
For problems based on the POMG model, MADDPG algo-
rithms can be deployed for agents to learn optimal policies
under centralized training and provide optimal actions with
only local observations. They do not require speciﬁc commu-
nications between agents and can be applied for a cooperative
environment [25]. Thus, an MADDPG algorithm is expected
to solve the proposed VVC optimization problem.
In an MADDPG algorithm, an experience replay and target
networks are applied, which can effectively mitigate impacts
of sample correlations on neural network training and thus
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Texas at Arlington. Downloaded on June 27,2026 at 06:10:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

LIU et al.: ROBUST REGIONAL COORDINATION OF INVERTER-BASED Volt/Var CONTROL
5425
improving the overall optimization performance [31]. Hence,
each agent has one set of neural networks including policy
network πm, Q network Qm, target policy network π′
m and
target Q network Q′
m, with their parameters denoted as θπm,
θQm, θπ′
m, and θQ′
m, respectively. Each agent learns optimal
behavior by adjusting its policy parameters θπm towards max-
imizing the performance objective J(θπm) that is based on the
Q value. In the perspective of neural networks, the parameters
of policy network πm should be updated in the direction of
∇θπm J(θπm), which is policy gradient and can be estimated
as follows [25],
∇θπm J

θπm
≈Es∼ρ,a∼θπm

∇θπm logπm

om
 θπm
Qm

s, a|θQm
 
,
(22)
Here, Q network Qm has two inputs, i.e., observations s =
{o1, . . . , oM} and actions a = {a1, . . . , aM} from all agents. On
the other hand, its output Qm(s, a|θQm) denotes the centralized
state-action value. Besides, ρ denotes the state distribution.
s ∼ρ and a ∼θπm refer to the states sampled from the state
distribution and the actions sampled from the policy network
πm given state s, respectively.
Speciﬁcally, the neural networks are expected to be well
initialized, which can boost up the training efﬁciency and
the optimization performance. In practice, historical opera-
tion data, either from expert operation records or mathematical
optimization results, can be available and can accurately reﬂect
the model and characteristics of practical ADNs. Hence, these
operation data could provide good demonstrations for DRL
agents and be utilized to obtain fair estimations for Q values.
To this point, an improved MADDPG algorithm is developed
by applying a behavior cloning algorithm [32], [33] and expert
target Q value estimations, to pre-train the policy networks and
the Q networks, respectively. The behavior cloning algorithm
for the policy networks is an effective unsupervised learning
algorithm with the following objective,
min
θπm

E(om,a∗m)∼ρ∗Lπ
m(a∗
m, πm(om|θπm))

.
(23)
Herein, (om, a∗
m) are observation-action pairs sampled from an
exogenous expert dataset ρ∗, and Lπ
m(a∗
m, πm(om|θπm)) repre-
sents the policy loss function of expert action a∗
m and policy
network action πm(om|θπm)) given observation om.
In regard to the Q networks, a pre-training process with
the estimated expert target Q values is developed. Assuming
the actions of expert agents a∗are optimal with no further
adjustments required, the reward shall keep constant or slightly
increased for each decision timestep t ∈T after transition
(s, a∗, s′), i.e., rm,t ≥
m

s, a∗, s′
∀t ∈T. Therefore, accord-
ing to Eq. (19), the expert target Q values can be estimated
as,
Qπ∗
m (s, a) =
m

s, a∗, s′
+
T−1

t=1
γ t
m,t
= μ
T−1

t=0
γ t
m

s, a∗, s′
,
(24)
Algorithm 1: MADDPG for RRC-VVC
1 Pre-train πm(om) via behavior cloning:
min
θπm

E(o,a∗)∼ρ∗Lπ
m(a∗, πm(om|θπm))

2 Pre-train Qm(s, a) with estimated expert target Q:
min
θQm

LQ
m(μ
T−1
t=0 γ trm

s, a∗, s′
, Qm

s, a∗ θQm
)

3 Initialize π′m(o′m), Q′m(s
′, a
′) by:
θπ′m ←−θπm, θQ′m ←−θQm
∀m ∈M
4 Initialize experience replays M and Mf , action exploration process with
Gaussian noise G(π

o
 θπ
, ε)
5 for each episode, do
6
Initialize a stochastic state st0 = {o1,t0, . . . , oM,t0}
7
Solve AC power ﬂow and update state as st0
8
for decision timestep t ∈T, do
9
∀om,t ∈st, determine action am,t = G(πm

om,t
 θπm
, ε),
constrained by

am,t,min, am,t,max
	
∀m ∈M
10
Execute actions at = {a1,t, . . . , aM,t} in AC power ﬂow,
observe new system state s′t
11
Generate U stochastic scenarios on state st
12
for scenario u ∈U, do
13
Execute actions at in AC power ﬂow
14
end for
15
Derive rewards rt = (r1,t, . . . , rM,t) with power ﬂow results
under all stochastic scenarios
16
Update system state st ←s′t
17
if M is full, then
18
Stack transition {st, at, s′t, rt} in Mf
19
if Mf is full, then
20
Push transitions from Mf to M, replace ones with
lowest priorities
21
Update priorities in M
22
end
23
Execute MADDPG Training procedure and decay
exploration noise ε
24
else
25
Stack transition {st, at, s′t, rt} in M
26
end
27
end for
28 end for
where μ ≤1 is the estimation factor of target Q values.
After initializing these neural networks, the agents can
interact with the environment. To address the spatial and tem-
poral uncertainties, this paper applies a stochastic state s0 =
{o1,t0, . . . , oM,t0} for each episode in the exploration stage. In
each operation period, the policy network πm ﬁrstly generates
actions am,t for agent m according to its input observations
om,t, network parameters θπm, and exploration noise ε. With
the actions at = {a1,t, . . . , aM,t} being executed in the envi-
ronment, the system reaches a new state s′
t = {o′
1,t, . . . , o′
M,t}.
Meanwhile, temporal uncertainty scenarios are generated with
the environment based on state st and the predicted intervals
given in Eq. (10) and (11). With the actions being taken into
these scenarios, the reward set rt = (r1,t, . . . , rM,t) could
be derived with the power ﬂow results under all these sce-
narios by agent reward functions given in Eq. (18), (20)
and (21). The transition {st, at, s′
t, rt} is then stacked in the
experience replay M for the later training progress. The
whole proposed MADDPG algorithm is logically explained as
Algorithm 1.
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Texas at Arlington. Downloaded on June 27,2026 at 06:10:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

5426
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SMART GRID, VOL. 12, NO. 6, NOVEMBER 2021
Algorithm 2: MADDPG Training procedure
1 Sample a random minibatch of K transitions
{sk, ak, s′k, rk} from M based on priorities
2 for agent m ∈M do
3
Derive the target Q value:
yk
m = rk
m + γ Q′
m(s′k, a′k|θQ′
m)
4
Derive the loss function for Q networks:
LQ
m = 1
K

k∈K

yk
m −Qm

sk, ak  θQm
2
5
Update the Q network by minimizing the
loss:θQm ←−θQm −βQ∇θQmLm
6
Derive the sampled policy gradient:
∇θπm J(θπm)
≈1
K

k∈K
∇akmQm

sk, ak  θQm
∇θπm πm

ok
m
 θπm
7
Update policy network with the policy gradient:
θπm ←−θπm + βπ∇θπmJ(θπm)
8
Update the target networks:
θπ′
m ←−σθπm + (1 −σ)θπ′
m
θQ′
m ←−σθQm + (1 −σ)θQ′
m
9 end for
With enough exploration, the networks start getting updated
in the training procedure where simultaneous explorations are
kept on. In this algorithm, a proportional prioritized expe-
rience replay [34] is applied to improve the optimization
performance, where the probability of sampling transition e
is dependent on its priority pe:
Pre =
pe

e∈M pe
,
(25)
pe =


m∈M
ηe,m
 + ϵ.
(26)
Herein, ηe,m is the temporal difference (TD) error that indi-
cates the distance of the current Q value from its target Q
value estimation for transition e and agent m, and ϵ is a small
positive constant to ensure a non-zero probability for each
transition.
To avoid excessive recalculations of priority, this paper
applies a prioritized ﬂash replay Mf , where the new transi-
tions are temporarily stored when M is full. When reaching its
capacity limit, Mf pushes the stored transitions into the main
experience replay M, and in which the transitions with low
priorities are replaced. After this, the priorities of transitions
are recalculated in M.
The training procedure is explained as Algorithm 2.
In
detail,
ﬁrstly,
a
prioritized
minibatch
of
K
transi-
tions {sk, ak, s′k, rk} are sampled from the main experience
replay M. Then for each agent, Q network Qm evaluates the
Fig. 3.
Progress of proposed data-driven RRC-VVC.
Q value for agent m of each {sk, ak}. On the other hand, target
policy network π′
m generates action a′
m
k for each o′
m
k from the
sampled minibatch, and the target Q network Q′
m then evalu-
ates the target Q value for agent m with inputs {s′k, a′k, rk
m}.
After that, Q network Qm updates its parameters θQm via gradi-
ent descent, by minimizing the loss function LQ
m derived from
these two Q values. Following this, policy network parame-
ters θπm can be updated by the policy gradient derived from
network πm and Qm. Once these two networks are updated,
the corresponding target networks π′
m and Q′
m can be updated
with a soft update velocity factor σ.
E. Data-Driven RRC-VVC
Finally, by applying the proposed MADDPG algorithm,
a data-driven RRC-VVC method is proposed, and its complete
progress is illustrated in Fig. 3.
As mentioned in Section III-C, in each episode, the spatial
uncertainty model is ﬁrstly established, and data are nor-
malized for the neural network training purpose. With input
data initialized, the initial power ﬂow is solved to check
convergence and generate the initial state data. Note that if
the power ﬂow does not converge, the corresponding state
data cannot be used for training and hence should be re-
initialized. If converging, the agents then start to interact
with the simulated power ﬂow environment and accumulate
knowledge in the exploration stage.
According to the initialized system data, the reactive power
setpoints in each sub-network are ﬁrstly generated by agents.
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Texas at Arlington. Downloaded on June 27,2026 at 06:10:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

LIU et al.: ROBUST REGIONAL COORDINATION OF INVERTER-BASED Volt/Var CONTROL
5427
In the following step, exploration noises are added onto
the reactive power setpoints to ensure sufﬁcient explorations
of agents. Subsequently, the action data are de-normalized
according to the inverter reactive power compensation capaci-
ties, and these dispatch decisions are sent to each PV inverters.
Under Var-priority mode, the active power injection of each
PV inverter is also updated, with active power curtailment
when necessary. Once the system operating condition is
updated, the AC power ﬂow is solved to transit from the
current state to the next one. Meanwhile, the reactive power
setpoints are taken into parallel temporal uncertainty scenar-
ios, from which the power ﬂow results are obtained, and the
rewards are calculated. It is worth mentioning that the aver-
age reward derived with all the temporal uncertainty scenarios
by using Eq. (18), (20), and (21) is different from a single-
sampled reward. Firstly, the bus voltage violations across all
the temporal uncertainty scenarios are summed up in Eq. (21),
and hence the penalties of the voltage violations are imposed
accordingly on the average reward. Secondly, since the power
ﬂow model is non-linear, the mean value of power ﬂow results
under all the temporal uncertainty scenarios could be differ-
ent from the power ﬂow result under the mean scenario. With
the above derived, the transition is stored in the prioritized
experience replay.
As the experience replay reaches its capacity limit, the train-
ing process is involved with prioritized batch data sampled.
The training process updates all the neural network parame-
ters in each timestep, and the agents keep interacting with the
environment with their updated policy networks. Note that the
exploration noise is gradually reduced as agents get trained.
Once the exploration reaches the training episode limit or the
convergence condition, the training process terminates, and the
well-trained model is saved for online optimization use. As
aforementioned, the reward function of each agent consists
of regional network power losses and bus voltage deviations,
which are all related to the neighbor sub-networks. Thus, in the
centralized training stage, while each agent learns to maximize
its expected, discounted, and accumulated return, it also grad-
ually establishes the behavior policy with coordination with
other agents. Eventually, a regional coordination methodology
is developed.
This work focuses on the inverter-based VVC, but the
proposed method is applicable to all Var resources with con-
tinuous variables, including reactive power setpoints of DG
units and energy storage systems.
IV. CASE STUDY
A. Testing System Description
Numerical tests are conducted on the IEEE 123-node feeder
system [35]. This distribution network is partitioned into 4 sub-
networks [9] with interconnection, as displayed in Fig. 4.
The PV penetration rate is set as 100%, i.e., PV systems
are installed with the same capacities as peak loads on all
buses. The inverter apparent power capacity on each bus SPV
i
is oversized to 110% of the installed PV active power capacity
PPV
i,max, allowing sufﬁcient reactive power compensation [28].
Moreover, with reference to [27], the inverter reactive power
Fig. 4.
Network partition for IEEE 123-node distribution network.
TABLE I
UNCERTAINTY SETUP
capacity factor δ is chosen as 0.6. All the other Var resources
are not included in this VVC optimization model, and thus
they are assumed as ﬁxed settings in the ADN. The weighting
factor ω is set as 0.5 to achieve a trade-off between the two
objectives. The voltage range is set as [0.95, 1.05] p.u. with
the reference voltage Vref as 1 p.u. for all buses. The voltage
constraint violation penalty factor λ is set as 10, and all the
rewards are scaled up by 103.
Two cases are investigated in the tests – the PV-peak case
with 50% load and 100% PV power generation, as well as
the load-peak case with 100% load and 0% PV power gen-
eration. Considering the locational and short-term variations
of solar irradiance and demand proﬁles, spatial and temporal
uncertainties are set up accordingly in Table I. The intervals of
spatial uncertainties are based on the day-ahead or hour-ahead
predicted uncertainty boundaries. These intervals are propor-
tional to the installed PV capacities and loads, and are different
for the two cases. On the other hand, the intervals of tempo-
ral uncertainties are based on real-time and small variations
due to communication and inverter response delays, as illus-
trated in Fig. 2. Thus, the intervals of temporal uncertainties
are dependent on the real-time data at time t, which can be
further sampled from the above spatial uncertainty scenarios.
The probability distributions of spatial and temporal uncer-
tainties are assumed to be known. Without loss of generality,
uniform distributions are used in this paper. It is noted that
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Texas at Arlington. Downloaded on June 27,2026 at 06:10:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

5428
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SMART GRID, VOL. 12, NO. 6, NOVEMBER 2021
distributional ambiguity can also be considered via an ambi-
guity set of uncertainties [11], so that accurate probability
distributions are not required.
Refering to the settings in [25] and after sensitivity analy-
sis, the hyperparameters in this work are ﬁnalized as follows.
Each policy network πm has three fully connected layers,
and four for Q network Qm. As the observation spaces have
lager dimensions than action spaces, the dimensions of the
hidden layers in the policy network πm are set as 2dom and
dam. Similarly, the dimensions of hidden layers in Q networks
are set as 2 
m∈M (dom, dam), 
m∈M (dom, dam), and 300. The
Adam optimizer is applied [36], with the learning rates for pol-
icy network βπ and Q network βQ both as 10−5, the reward
discount factor γ as 0.9, and the soft update velocity fac-
tor σ as 0.01. The target Q value estimation factor μ is set
as 0.95. The capacity of the main experience replay and the
ﬂash experience replay is 2×104 and 1×103, respectively, and
the minibatch size is 128. The initial exploration noise vari-
able ε is 6 and it starts to decay by 0.1% towards 0 at every
timestep in the training stage. The input layers and hidden
layers of both policy and Q networks deploy Rectiﬁed Linear
Unit (ReLU) activation function φ(x) = max(0, x), and same
for the target networks. On the other hand, the output layers
of Q and target Q networks utilize linear activation function
φ(x) = x, while the output layers of policy and policy tar-
get networks utilize tanh activation function φ(x) = ex−e−x
ex+e−x .
Regarding data normalization and de-normalization process,
since the operation ranges of the system data are given, the
max-min normalization method is deployed.
The simulations are conducted on a 64-bit PC with Intel
Core 8-core 3.60GHz i7-9700K CPU and one NVIDIA Ge-
Force RTX 2080 Ti GPU using Python platform, with the AC
Power Flow solved by the PYPOWER solver [37].
B. Data-Driven RRC-VVC Performance
The performance of the proposed data-driven RRC-VVC
method is analyzed through simulations under the original
network topology shown in Fig. 4. By using the proposed
MADDPG algorithm, the agents learn rapidly from the train-
ing process with the prioritized experience replay, as well
as the initialization stage with expert targe Q estimation and
behavior cloning. The average voltage deviation and network
power loss for the proposed method under both PV-peak and
load-peak cases are shown in Figs. 5 and 6, respectively. The
performance of the other two MADDPG algorithms with dif-
ferent initialization processes are shown in these ﬁgures as
well. To compare the convergence, the weighted sums of the
normalized objectives are also included in these ﬁgures. The
results from the random initialized and the self-training ini-
tialized algorithms are denoted as Rand. Init. and Self. Init.,
respectively.
For the proposed method, the mean of absolute voltage devi-
ations and the network power loss converge quickly in the
PV-peak case, to around 0.011 p.u. and 0.005 p.u., whereas
the other two algorithms would need much more episodes to
reach convergence. On the other hand, in the load-peak case,
the mean absolute voltage deviations and the network power
Fig. 5.
Data-driven RRC-VVC results under the PV-peak case.
Fig. 6.
Data-driven RRC-VVC results under the load-peak case.
loss of the proposed algorithm decrease rapidly to 0.016 p.u.
and 0.012 p.u., respectively, while the other algorithms reach
convergence with the larger voltage deviations, network power
losses, and weighted sum of the normalized objectives. These
results validate efﬁcient convergence and high performance
of the proposed algorithm with the developed prioritized
experience replay and initialization process.
To compare the optimization performance with the con-
ventional mathematical method, a scenario-based stochastic
optimization method is applied [38], with consideration of
uncertainties, i.e., pMPP
i,t
, pd
i,t, and qd
i,t. The objective function is
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Texas at Arlington. Downloaded on June 27,2026 at 06:10:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

LIU et al.: ROBUST REGIONAL COORDINATION OF INVERTER-BASED Volt/Var CONTROL
5429
TABLE II
PERFORMANCE COMPARISON UNDER THE PV-PEAK CASE
TABLE III
PERFORMANCE COMPARISON UNDER THE LOAD-PEAK CASE
set as the same with the proposed method, i.e., minimization
of bus voltage deviations and network power losses with the
same weighting factors. Besides, the control variables are
inverter reactive power setpoints. This stochastic optimization
method uses a ﬁnite number of representative scenarios for
spatial uncertainty realizations of PV power generation and
loads. With a branch ﬂow based SOCP model for the distri-
bution network [39], a scenario-based stochastic optimization
problem is formulated and solved by the GUROBI solver [40].
In this case study, considering computing efﬁciency and
optimization quality, 100 representative scenarios are gen-
erated, where PV power outputs and loads are on differ-
ent levels across the network to present spatial uncertainty
characteristics.
The optimization performance of the proposed data-driven
RRC-VVC method is summarized in Tables II and III for the
two cases, with maximum voltage deviation Vmax, mean of
absolute voltage deviations Vmean, and network power loss
Ploss derived from the average of last 100 episodes. For the
purpose of comparison, the results given by the scenario-based
stochastic optimization method, and those from the two con-
ventional MADDPG algorithms are listed in column Math,
MADDPG (Rand. Init), and MADDPG (Self. Init), respec-
tively. The conventional stochastic optimization method and
MADDPG based methods use the same objective function with
the proposed data-driven RRC-VVC method. The training time
in the tables refers to the CPU time of 4000-episode training
process for the DRL algorithms, and the optimization time
refers to the CPU time for solving the stochastic optimization
problem or for all agents to determine agent actions under
given observations.
The effectiveness of the proposed method could be evalu-
ated in terms of maximum bus voltage deviations, means of
absolute bus voltage deviations, and network power losses.
For the PV-peak case, all the data-driven based methods
TABLE IV
ROBUSTNESS CHECK UNDER THE PV-PEAK CASE
TABLE V
ROBUSTNESS CHECK UNDER THE LOAD-PEAK CASE
achieve the similar results, but the proposed method is more
effective on the reduction of bus voltage deviations. In com-
parison with Math, the proposed method achieves much less
network power loss. For the load-peak case, the proposed
data-drive method fully outperforms Rand. Init, and it is com-
petitive with Self. Init but with the less maximum voltage
deviation. Compared with Math, the results of the proposed
method are still acceptable with just a higher mean voltage
deviation.
In terms of training time, the proposed MADDPG algorithm
has an additional initialization stage with behavior cloning and
expert target Q value estimation, as well as recalculations of
experience priorities for the prioritized experience replay, its
training time is slightly longer compared to those conven-
tional data-driven algorithms without the prioritized experi-
ence replay. However, as discussed above, the performance of
the proposed algorithm is better than the conventional ones,
and the training processes of these conventional algorithms
converge slowly under the PV-peak case. On the other hand,
although the mathematical stochastic optimization method
does not require such a training process, its optimization time
is extremely longer than the MADDPG-based methods. These
MADDPG-based methods have a similar optimization time of
around 0.014 second, which is fully compatible and preferred
for online use.
C. Robustness Check
To examine the operation performance and operating robust-
ness against the spatial and temporal uncertainties, another
5000 scenarios are sampled as uncertainty realizations by the
Monte Carlo method for both PV-peak and load-peak cases.
With these scenarios, the mathematical stochastic optimization
(Math) and the proposed data-driven RRC-VVC methods
are applied to obtain the VVC results, including Vmax,
Vmean, and Ploss. Besides, numbers of violation scenarios
are calculated to indicate the operation robustness against the
uncertainties. the comparison results are shown in Tables IV
and V.
From these tables, for both PV-peak and load-peak cases,
the proposed data-driven RRC-VVC method outperforms the
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Texas at Arlington. Downloaded on June 27,2026 at 06:10:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

5430
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SMART GRID, VOL. 12, NO. 6, NOVEMBER 2021
TABLE VI
SWITCH SETUP FOR NETWORK RECONFIGURATION CASES
TABLE VII
PERFORMANCE COMPARISON UNDER NETWORK RECONFIGURATION
FOR THE PV-PEAK CASE
TABLE VIII
PERFORMANCE COMPARISON UNDER NETWORK RECONFIGURATION
FOR THE LOAD-PEAK CASE
mathematical one in terms of network power loss reduction.
For the bus voltage deviations, the proposed method can
provide comparable results. Besides, both the proposed data-
driven method and the well-developed mathematical one can
achieve no operating violation for all the scenarios. Thus,
the proposed data-driven RRC-VVC method can achieve
high operation performance and operating robustness against
the spatial and temporal uncertainties, with high computing
efﬁciency (as shown in Tables II and III).
D. Performance Under Network Reconﬁguration
As the network topology of an ADN could be changed fre-
quently, performance analysis of the proposed method under
network reconﬁguration is essential. To this point, another two
cases with different network topologies of the IEEE 123-node
feeder system are used for performance analysis and robust-
ness check. As shown in Fig. 4 and Table VI, there are three
switches considered in this paper. In each testing case, there is
one switch open with the other two closed. Case-NR1 refers
to the original network conﬁguration used above, while Case-
NR2 and Case-NR3 refer to the network topologies with only
SW1 open and SW2 open, respectively. The simulation results
under these two cases are shown in Table VII and Table VIII,
for PV-peak and load-peak cases, separately.
According to the results below in Table VII and Table VIII,
the proposed RRC-VVC algorithm shows high applicability
and effectiveness under different network topologies, as well
as better performance in comparison with the mathematical
Fig. 7. Data-driven RRC-VVC results under Case-NR2 for the PV-peak case.
stochastic optimization method. Particularly, for the load-peak
case under topology Case-NR2, the bus voltage on bus 38
and 40 could reach as low as 0.889 p.u. without VVC, since
power supply to these busses has to ﬂow through sub-networks
1, 3, and 4. With the mathematical optimization deployed, the
mean of absolute bus voltage deviations is still 0.0232 p.u.,
and the network power loss is 0.0222 p.u. On the other hand,
the proposed method achieves much lower average of abso-
lute voltage deviations and network power losses. Overall, the
proposed method is applicable to network topological changes,
so that it is suggested for practical use.
The average voltage deviations, network power losses, and
weighed sums of the normalized objectives under topology
Case-NR2 are shown in Figs. 7 and 8, for PV-peak and load-
peak cases, respectively. For the PV-peak case, the proposed
algorithm demonstrates a stable and fast convergence result,
compared to the Self. Init and Rand. Init algorithms. This could
be particularly illustrated by the convergence of the weighed
sum. Whereas in the load-peak case, the average voltage devi-
ations and network power losses of all algorithms converge
smoothly, similar to Case-NR1. However, the proposed algo-
rithm achieves much lower average voltage deviation, network
power loss, and weighted sum of the normalized objectives.
These results demonstrate that the proposed algorithm outper-
forms the other two conventional data-driven algorithms on
both convergence and optimization performance.
V. CONCLUSION
This paper proposes a data-driven RRC-VVC method to
optimize the Var dispatch within each sub-network in an
ADN against spatial and temporal uncertainties. With the
RRC-VVC optimization problem formulated into a POMG
model, the agents in the proposed MADDPG algorithm are
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Texas at Arlington. Downloaded on June 27,2026 at 06:10:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

LIU et al.: ROBUST REGIONAL COORDINATION OF INVERTER-BASED Volt/Var CONTROL
5431
Fig. 8.
Data-driven RRC-VVC results under Case-NR2 for the load-peak
case.
trained to minimize bus voltage deviations and network power
losses simultaneously. The simulations conducted on the IEEE
123-node system under the PV-peak and load-peak cases val-
idate the convergence of the proposed MADDPG algorithm.
Besides, in comparison with existing mathematical and data-
driven methods, the proposed data-driven RRC-VVC method
can achieve high operation performance and robustness against
the spatial and temporal uncertainties.
In future works, VVC resources with discrete variables, such
as OLTCs, switching CBs and soft open points, will be incor-
porated with the proposed method to be compatible with the
full suite of VVC devices and ADN control. Besides, distribu-
tional ambiguity of spatial and temporal uncertainties will be
considered in the proposed MADDPG algorithm. Furthermore,
multiple conﬂicting optimization objectives would also be
considered, with multi-tasking machine learning algorithms.
APPENDIX
For completeness, the decomposition process from Eq. (17)
to Eq. (19) is clariﬁed below. As deﬁned in Section III,
Qπ(s, a) is the expected return for the agent taking action
a at state s, and then following policy π. Therefore, it could
be reformulated as,
Qπ(s, a) = Eπ

T−t

k=0
γ krt+k
 st = s, at = a

= Eπ

rt + γ rt+1 + γ 2rt+2 + · · · + γ T−trT
 st = s, at = a

= Eπ

rt + γ

rt+1 + γ rt+2 + . . . + γ T−t−1rT
  st = s, at = a

= Eπ

rt + γ Qπ(st+1, at+1)
 st = s, at = a

=

s′
T

s′  s, a

(r

s, a, s′
+ γ

a′
π

a′  s′
Qπ
s′, a′
)
As
explained
in
Section
III-B,
the
transition
function
represents the system dynamics and predicts the next state
after agents taking actions at the current state. In the power
ﬂow environment, it is deterministic, which means one set of
state and action corresponds to one deterministic set of next
state and reward. Hence, there is:
Qπ(s, a) = r

s, a, s′
+ γ

a′
π

a′  s′
Qπ
s′, a′
.
Assuming an optimal policy π∗exists, its state-action value
function Qπ∗(s, a) must be the maximum state-action value
that can be achieved by any policy for any state st = s
and action at = a. Otherwise, π∗′ that makes Qπ∗′(s, a) >
Qπ∗(s, a) should be the better policy than π∗. Hence,
Qπ∗(s, a) = maxa Qπ(s, a), and there is:
Qπ∗(s, a) = r

s, a, s′
+ γ max
a′ Qπ∗(s′, a′).
REFERENCES
[1] H. Sun et al., “Review of challenges and research opportunities for
voltage control in smart grids,” IEEE Trans. Power Syst., vol. 34, no. 4,
pp. 2790–2801, Jul. 2019.
[2] D. Jin, H.-D. Chiang, and P. Li, “Two-timescale multi-objective coordi-
nated volt/var optimization for active distribution networks,” IEEE Trans.
Power Syst., vol. 34, no. 6, pp. 4418–4428, Nov. 2019.
[3] W. Zheng, W. Wu, B. Zhang, and Y. Wang, “Robust reactive power
optimisation and voltage control method for active distribution networks
via dual time-scale coordination,” IET Gener. Transm. Distrib., vol. 11,
no. 6, pp. 1461–1471, Apr. 2017.
[4] C. Zhang, Y. Xu, Z. Dong, and J. Ravishankar, “Three-stage robust
inverter-based voltage/var control for distribution networks with high-
level PV,” IEEE Trans. Smart Grid, vol. 10, no. 1, pp. 782–793,
Jan. 2019.
[5] R. P. Xu, C. Zhang, Y. Xu, and Z. Y. Dong, “Rolling horizon based
multi-objective robust voltage/VAR regulation with conservation volt-
age reduction in high PV-penetrated distribution networks,” IET Gener.
Transm. Distrib., vol. 13, no. 9, pp. 1621–1629, May 2019.
[6] K. E. Antoniadou-Plytaria, I. N. Kouveliotis-Lysikatos, P. S. Georgilakis
and N. D. Hatziargyriou, “Distributed and decentralized voltage control
of smart distribution networks: Models, methods, and future research,”
IEEE Trans. Smart Grid, vol. 8, no. 6, pp. 2999–3008, Nov. 2017.
[7] H. Ji et al., “A centralized-based method to determine the local voltage
control strategies of distributed generator operation in active distribution
networks,” Appl. Energy, vol. 228, pp. 2024–2036, Oct. 2018.
[8] P. Li et al., “MPC-based local voltage control strategy of DGs in active
distribution networks,” IEEE Trans. Sustain. Energy, vol. 11, no. 4,
pp. 2911–2921, Oct. 2020.
[9] P. Li, C. Zhang, Z. Wu, Y. Xu, M. Hu, and Z. Dong, “Distributed adap-
tive robust voltage/var control with network partition in active distribu-
tion networks,” IEEE Trans. Smart Grid, vol. 11, no. 3, pp. 2245–2256,
May 2020.
[10] W. Zheng, W. Wu, B. Zhang, H. Sun, and Y. Liu, “A fully distributed
reactive power optimization and control method for active distribu-
tion networks,” IEEE Trans. Smart Grid, vol. 7, no. 2, pp. 1021–1033,
Mar. 2016.
[11] W. Huang, W. Zheng, and D. J. Hill, “Distributionally robust optimal
power ﬂow in multi-microgrids with decomposition and guaranteed
convergence,” IEEE Trans. Smart Grid, vol. 12, no. 1, pp. 43–55,
Jan. 2021.
[12] H. Saberi, C. Zhang, and Z. Y. Dong, “Data-driven distributionally robust
hierarchical coordination for home energy management,” IEEE Trans.
Smart Grid, early access, Jun. 11, 2021.
[13] C. Zhang and Y. Xu, “Hierarchically-coordinated voltage/VAR control
of distribution networks using PV inverters,” IEEE Trans. Smart Grid,
vol. 11, no. 4, pp. 2942–2953, Jul. 2020.
[14] T. Ding, Q. Yang, Y. Yang, C. Li, Z. Bie, and F. Blaabjerg, “A data-
driven stochastic reactive power optimization considering uncertainties
in active distribution networks and decomposition method,” IEEE Trans.
Smart Grid, vol. 9, no. 5, pp. 4994–5004, Sep. 2018.
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Texas at Arlington. Downloaded on June 27,2026 at 06:10:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

5432
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SMART GRID, VOL. 12, NO. 6, NOVEMBER 2021
[15] Y. Xu, Z. Y. Dong, R. Zhang, and D. J. Hill, “Multi-timescale coor-
dinated voltage/var control of high renewable-penetrated distribution
systems,” IEEE Trans. Power Syst., vol. 32, no. 6, pp. 4398–4408,
Nov. 2017.
[16] J. G. Vlachogiannis and N. D. Hatziargyriou, “Reinforcement learning
for reactive power control,” IEEE Trans. Power Syst., vol. 19, no. 3,
pp. 1317–1325, Aug. 2004.
[17] Y. Xu, W. Zhang, W. Liu, and F. Ferrese, “Multiagent-based reinforce-
ment learning for optimal reactive power dispatch,” IEEE Trans. Syst.,
Man, Cybern. C, Appl. Rev., vol. 42, no. 6, pp. 1742–1751, Nov. 2012.
[18] Y. Li, “Deep reinforcement learning: An overview,” 2017. [Online].
Available: arXiv:1701.07274.
[19] R. Diao, Z. Wang, D. Shi, Q. Chang, J. Duan, and X. Zhang,
“Autonomous voltage control for grid operation using deep rein-
forcement
learning,”
in
Proc.
IEEE
Power
Energy
Soc.
Gen.
Meeting (PESGM), Atlanta, GA, USA, 2019, pp. 1–5.
[20] H. Xu, A. D. Domínguez-García, and P. W. Sauer, “Optimal tap setting
of voltage regulation transformers using batch reinforcement learning,”
IEEE Trans. Power Syst., vol. 35, no. 3, pp. 1990–2001, May 2020.
[21] W. Wang, N. Yu, Y. Gao, and J. Shi, “Safe off-policy deep reinforcement
learning algorithm for volt-VAR control in power distribution systems,”
IEEE Trans. Smart Grid, vol. 11, no. 4, pp. 3008–3018, Jul. 2020.
[22] Q. Yang, G. Wang, A. Sadeghi, G. B. Giannakis, and J. Sun, “Two-
timescale voltage control in distribution grids using deep reinforcement
learning,” IEEE Trans. Smart Grid, vol. 11, no. 3, pp. 2313–2323,
May 2020.
[23] J. Duan et al., “Deep-reinforcement-learning-based autonomous voltage
control for power grid operations,” IEEE Trans. Power Syst., vol. 35,
no. 1, pp. 814–817, Jan. 2020.
[24] D. Cao, W. Hu, J. Zhao, Q. Huang, Z. Chen, and F. Blaabjerg, “A
multi-agent deep reinforcement learning based voltage regulation using
coordinated PV inverters,” IEEE Trans. Power Syst., vol. 35, no. 5,
pp. 4120–4123, Sep. 2020.
[25] R. Lowe, Y. I. Wu, A. Tamar, J. Harb, P. Abbeel, and I. Mordatch,
“Multi-agent actor-critic for mixed cooperative-competitive environ-
ments,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems.
Red Hook, NY, USA: Curran, 2017, pp. 6379–6390.
[26] D. Cao, J. Zhao, W. Hu, F. Ding, Q. Huang, and Z. Chen, “Attention
enabled multi-agent DRL for decentralized volt-VAR control of active
distribution system using PV inverters and SVCs,” IEEE Trans. Sustain.
Energy, vol. 12, no. 3, pp. 1582–1592, Jul. 2021.
[27] F. Ding et al., “Photovoltaic impact assessment of smart inverter
volt-VAR control on distribution system conservation voltage reduc-
tion and power quality,” Nat. Renew. Energy Lab, Golden, CO, USA,
Rep. NREL/TP-5D00-67296, 2016.
[28] K. Turitsyn, P. Sulc, S. Backhaus, and M. Chertkov, “Options for control
of reactive power by distributed photovoltaic generators,” Proc. IEEE,
vol. 99, no. 6, pp. 1063–1073, Jun. 2011.
[29] C. Zhang, Y. Xu, Z. Y. Dong, and R. Zhang, “Multi-objective adap-
tive robust voltage/VAR control for high-PV penetrated distribution
networks,” IEEE Trans. Smart Grid, vol. 11, no. 6, pp. 5288–5300,
Nov. 2020.
[30] M. Xie, J. Xiong, S. Ke, and M. Liu, “Two-stage compensation algo-
rithm for dynamic economic dispatching considering copula correlation
of multiwind farms generation,” IEEE Trans. Sustain. Energy, vol. 8,
no. 2, pp. 763–771, Apr. 2017.
[31] T. P. Lillicrap et al., “Continuous control with deep reinforcement
learning,” 2015. [Online]. Available: arXiv:1509.02971.
[32] F. Torabi, G. Warnell, and P. Stone, “Behavioral cloning from observa-
tion,” 2018. [Online]. Available: arXiv:1805.01954.
[33] Y. Yue and H. M. Le, “Imitation learning,” presented at the Int.
Conf. Mach. Learn., Stockholm, Sweden, Jul. 2018. [Online]. Available:
https://sites.google.com/view/icml2018-imitation-learning/
[34] T. Schaul, J. Quan, I. Antonoglou, and D. Silver, “Prioritized experience
replay,” 2015. [Online]. Available: arXiv:1511.05952.
[35] K. P. Schneider et al., “Analytic considerations and design basis for the
IEEE distribution test feeders,” IEEE Trans. Power Syst., vol. 33, no. 3,
pp. 3181–3188, May 2018.
[36] D. P. Kingma and J. Ba, “Adam: A method for stochastic optimization,”
2014. [Online]. Available: arXiv:1412.6980.
[37] R. D. Zimmerman, C. E. Murillo-Sánchez, and R. J. Thomas,
“MATPOWER: Steady-state operations, planning, and analysis tools
for power systems research and education,” IEEE Trans. Power Syst.,
vol. 26, no. 1, pp. 12–19, Feb. 2011.
[38] Q. Chai, C. Zhang, Y. Xu, and Z. Y. Dong, “PV inverter reliability-
constrained volt/var control of distribution networks,” IEEE Trans.
Sustain. Energy, vol. 12, no. 3, pp. 1788–1800, Jul. 2021.
[39] M. Farivar and S. H. Low, “Branch ﬂow model: Relaxations and
convexiﬁcation—Part I,” IEEE Trans. Power Syst., vol. 28, no. 3,
pp. 2554–2564, Aug. 2013.
[40] GUROBI. Accessed: Jul. 2020. [Online]. Available: http://www.gurobi.
com
Hangyue
Liu
(Graduate
Student
Member,
IEEE) received the B.E. degree from Southwest
Jiaotong University, Chengdu, China, in 2014, and
the M.E. degree in electrical engineering from
The University of Sydney, Sydney, Australia, in
2017. He is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree
in electrical engineering with the University of
New South Wales, Sydney, Australia. His current
research interests include power system opera-
tion and planning, active distribution networks,
microgrids, multienergy systems, and applications
of deep reinforcement learning theory in these areas.
Cuo Zhang (Member, IEEE) received the B.E.
degree (Hons.) in electrical (power) engineering
from The University of Sydney, Australia, in 2014,
and the Ph.D. degree in electrical engineering
from the University of New South Wales (UNSW),
Australia, in 2018. He is currently a Research Fellow
with UNSW. His research interests include power
system planning and operation, voltage stability and
control, demand side management, microgrids, mul-
tienergy systems, and applications of optimization
theory and artiﬁcial intelligence in these areas. He
was a recipient of 2 IEEE PES General Meeting Best Conference Papers,
the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SMART GRID Best Reviewer, the UNSW
Promoting High Quality Research Papers Scheme Award, and the University
Medal from The University of Sydney.
Qingmian Chai received the B.Sc. and M.Sc.
degrees
in
electrical
engineering
from
Beijing
Jiaotong University, Beijing, China, in 2008 and
2010, respectively. He is currently pursuing the
Ph.D. degree in electrical engineering with the
University of New South Wales, Sydney, NSW,
Australia. His research interests include power
system planning and operation, voltage stability
and control, reliability of power electronics, and
applications of optimization theory in these areas.
Ke Meng (Member, IEEE) received the Ph.D.
degree in electrical engineering from The University
of Queensland, Brisbane, QLD, Australia, in 2009.
He is currently a Senior Lecturer with the School
of Electrical Engineering and Telecommunications,
University of New South Wales, Sydney, NSW,
Australia. He was a Lecturer with the School
of Electrical and Information Engineering, The
University
of
Sydney,
Camperdown,
NSW,
Australia.
His
research
interests
include
elec-
tric power system modeling, stability analysis,
renewable energy systems, and grid integration.
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Texas at Arlington. Downloaded on June 27,2026 at 06:10:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

LIU et al.: ROBUST REGIONAL COORDINATION OF INVERTER-BASED Volt/Var CONTROL
5433
Qinglai Guo (Senior Member, IEEE) was born on
March 6, 1979, in Jilin City, Jilin Province, China.
He received the B.S. degree from the Department
of
Electrical
Engineering,
Tsinghua
University,
Beijing, China, in 2000, and the Ph.D. degree from
Tsinghua University in 2005, where he is currently
a Professor. His special ﬁelds of interest include
smart grids, cyber–physical systems, and electrical
power control center applications. He is currently a
TCPC of Energy Internet Coordinating Committee
of IEEE PES, the Co-Chair of IEEE PES Work
Group on “Energy Internet,” IEEE PES Task Force on “Cyber–Physical
Interdependence for Power System Operation and Control,” and IEEE PES
Task Force on “Voltage Control for Smart Grid.” He is an Editorial Member
of IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON POWER SYSTEMS, Renewable and Sustainable
Energy Reviews, and IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SMART GRID. He is currently
an IET Fellow and a CIGRE member, and he is involved in ﬁve workgroups
of these organizations.
Zhao Yang Dong (Fellow, IEEE) received the Ph.D.
degree from The University of Sydney, Australia, in
1999. He is currently a SHARP Professor and the
Director of UNSW Digital Grid Futures Institute,
University of New South Wales, Australia. He
was previously a Ausgrid Chair and the Director
of the Ausgrid Centre for Intelligent Electricity
Networks providing support for the Smart Grid,
Smart City National Demonstration Project. His
research interests include smart grid, power system
planning and stability, renewable energy systems,
electricity market, and computational methods for power engineering appli-
cations. He is a Web of Science Highly Cited Researcher. He has served/is
serving as an editor for a number of IEEE Transactions and IET journals.
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Texas at Arlington. Downloaded on June 27,2026 at 06:10:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
