Abstract–This study recommends employing recurrent neural 
networks and reinforcement learning-based approaches to 
address challenges in micro-grid (MG) power management. The 
proposed MG contains combined cooling, heating, and power 
(CCHP), wind turbine (WT), photovoltaic (PV), and battery 
energy storage system (BESS). To effectively estimate the 
production of 24-hour renewable resources, a multi-layer 
recurrent neural network (MLRNN) model is developed, trained 
by historical wind and solar variables dataset. Over previously 
researched methods, the approach offers advantages, including 
improved accuracy and extracting non-linear mapping function 
amongst the features and output. Moreover, the model’s 
hyperparameters are tuned through an auto grid-search 
algorithm, which leads to a more accurate prediction. The 
forecasted values, then is employed in next study phase which is 
optimal power management within MG’s generation units. In this 
regard, a model free reinforcement learning is adopted to keep the 
multi-objective fuel and CO2 emission cost function minimized, to 
have a robust and environmentally friendly MG. So, a multi-agent 
reinforcement learning (MARL) is proposed to take the 
responsibility. The main objective of multi-agent solution is to 
overcome the challenging issue of finding the optimum operation 
points in a complicated environment with only one agent, by 
combining the simpler tasks that each agent does. According to the 
findings, the proposed MARL successfully dispatch the power 
generation among renewable resources and micro turbine in 
CCHP system, optimally. Moreover, the results validate the BESS 
proper performance in light and heavy load periods in the MG. 
 
Index Terms—Power management approach, multi-layer 
recurrent neural network, renewable resources power prediction, 
multi-agent reinforcement learning and energy storage. 
 
I. INTRODUCTION 
Several countries around the world are bringing carbon 
(CO2) emission and energy yield regulations into place to 
diminish the greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions and augment the 
energy efficiency [1]. As a result, the deployment of distributed 
generation (DG) systems, which primarily use renewable 
energy-based sources, is rapidly rising to meet the prescribed 
prospect. Infrastructures and system enlargement will be then 
required swiftly, alongside investments in storage technology, 
consumption and power generation management, and higher 
renewable energy supplies. Integrating the distributed energy 
resources (DERs) in to the insightful micro-grids (MGs) 
concept plays a vital role in supplying balanced and eco-
friendly operations for such safe functioning of the power 
system [2]. An accumulation of interlinked DERs and demands 
located in a region including a distinct electrical border 
comprise the MG [3]. Microgrids, which collaborate as a locally 
run power grid, can alternate among grid-connected and 
standalone states while operating. MGs embrace a range of DG 
blocks, including wind turbine (WT), photovoltaic (PV), 
battery energy storage system (BESS), and so forth. Although, 
an energy management strategy (EMS) is necessary for a MG 
to operate in grid-connected and stand-alone scenarios to 
properly adapt the energy supplied and exported from and to the 
main power network, and have more cost and power losses 
efficient, and reliable system [4].  
In MGs, EMS is frequently described as a nonlinear 
optimization issue. Numerous approaches, such as quadratic 
and mixed integer programming, particle swarm optimization, 
and genetic algorithm [5]-[7], have been suggested in the 
studies to tackle the EMS problems with different objective 
functions. Nevertheless, since the renewable energy sources 
and loads are unpredictable in real world problems, the 
mentioned methods rely on the day-ahead forecast's accuracy, 
and this has a negative impact on how the system operates with 
these algorithms, in real time [8].  
Depending on the Markov decision process (MDP), 
alternative types of EMS are available. An MDP includes a 
number of states, a sequence of operations, and reward 
functions. Though, in a practical case, the operator can just 
select the appropriate day type rather than assessing the 
generated power and load for the day, which could lead to a 
substandard solution. Reference [9], derived a near-optimal 
EMS for an MG, using a finite MDP-based supplemented by 
deep neural network learning. The approach, meanwhile, 
required a lot of calculation because the state space was large.  
The stochastic optimization (SO) based EMS is an option, as 
well. A finite collection of alternative situations is used by SO 
to explore the search area and makes decisions derived from 
empirical average of such possibilities. To reduce the real-time 
electricity cost, a SO-based EMS strategy for stand-alone grids 
was reported in [10]. With the same objective function, a real-
A Model-Free Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning Approach to 
Reach a Robust, Optimal, and Environment-Friendly Power 
Management in a Micro-Grid 
 
M. Nasir Uddin, Fellow, IEEE, and Yazdan H. Tabrizi  
 
Dept. of Electrical Engineering,  
Lakehead University,  
LU-GC program, Barrie, ON, L4M 3X9, Canada 
E-mail: muddin@lakeheadu.ca,  yhajimoh@lakeheadu.ca  
Page 1 of 9
2023-IASAM23-0015
2023 IEEE Industry Applications Society Annual Meeting (IAS) | 979-8-3503-2016-9/23/$31.00 ©2023 IEEE | DOI: 10.1109/IAS54024.2023.10406423
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Texas at Arlington. Downloaded on June 27,2026 at 06:15:06 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

time SO for EMS in domestic system contains WT, PV, and 
energy storage systems was suggested in [11]. But inherently, 
the SO is an iterative problem-solving approach. The iterative 
technique has two drawbacks: first, its convergence cannot 
always be assured, and secondly, implementation in real-world 
situations may not always be feasible [12]. 
Model predictive control (MPC) is another comprehensive 
approach that makes it through an explicit concept to forecast 
how the structure will respond in the upcoming and adapt the 
control plan over time. MPC has a proven track record of 
offering real-time solutions for multi-variable operations that 
are delayed and chaotic [13]. To reduce operating costs and 
carbon dioxide emission, an MPC-based EMS in an MG was 
provided in [14]. According to [15], an island MG was 
considered to analyze MPC-based, in order to lessen the 
negative consequences of unforeseen renewable energy units’ 
outputs. Conversely, MPC suffers from sophisticated 
calculation, high maintenance cost and lack of flexibility. 
Each of the techniques discussed above falls under the 
category of model-based solutions, in which the resources and 
the consumers are reflected by mathematical formulas. This 
will lead to a computationally expensive solution. The power 
management improvement is being treated by gravitational 
search algorithm [16], and artificial bee colony search 
algorithm [17] to highlight important mentioned issues. 
Although, for the highest fitness fulfillment, these algorithms 
have complicated parameter calculations, restrictions, coding 
challenges, and formulations. Furthermore, the adaptive neuro-
fuzzy inference system and fuzzy-logic controller still have 
drawbacks in power management problems, according to the 
literature [18]. In order to achieve consistent resolution 
forecasts and controller refinement, artificial neural network 
(ANN) based optimization approaches are a useful choice in 
this regard. Consequently, to get around the limitations of the 
aforementioned techniques, an ANN based binary particle 
swarm optimization controller was suggested in [19]. However, 
the method was a relatively complex approach, and the number 
of hyperparameters which should be precisely tuned increased. 
In terms of computational burden in certain situations, the 
traditional 
model-based 
approach 
sometimes 
become 
meaningless, making the data-driven approach more appealing 
and effective substitute. This research suggests using recurrent 
neural network (RNN) and reinforcement learning-based (RL) 
approach to overcome the EMS above-mentioned challenges in 
renewable energy resources output prediction, and optimal 
power management for an MG, accordingly. The proposed MG 
includes WT and PV renewable resources in addition to the 
BESS, which expands the number of variables and restrictions 
and increases the level of model complexity. Moreover, 
combined cooling, heating, and power (CCHP) system is also 
considered to deal with more sophisticated configuration. 
Multi-layer recurrent neural network (MLRNN) model is 
trained on a dataset of historical wind and solar features, to 
predict day-ahead renewable resources output, accurately. This 
approach offers several benefits compared to existing methods. 
It achieves improved accuracy by effectively capturing non-
linear features between the input and output datasets. 
Additionally, the model's hyperparameters are optimized using 
an automated grid-search algorithm, leading to accurate 
prediction compared to other approaches, resulting in superior 
performance. Then, MG is subjected to a model-free RL 
approach for optimum power flow performance, considering 
the predicted power of renewable energy resources by 
MLRNN. The goal of minimizing the cost function is to keep 
the price of fuel, and CO2 emissions minimized. Hence, the MG 
can be considered as robust and environmentally friendly 
system. With considerable exploration ability of the 
recommended multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) 
procedure, it is capable of reaching near-to-optimal cost 
function value. By merging the simpler tasks which every agent 
undertakes, multi-agent solutions aim to solve the tough 
problem of discovering the best operating points in a complex 
environment. This will improve the performance compared to 
the single agent RL. Throughout the multiple simulation 
outcomes, a thorough performance assessment of the suggested 
model-free MARL method is offered in order to confirm its 
probable viability in real-world situations. In addition, the 
findings confirm that the BESS operates effectively during 
periods of both low and high load in the Microgrid 
 
II. SYSTEM CONFIGURATION 
    The structure of the integrated energy system is provided 
in Fig. 1, which includes CCHP; micro-turbine (MT), as well as 
cooling and heating equipment like absorption chiller (AC), and 
gas boiler, PV and WT systems. Moreover, the electric energy 
storage (EES) which stores electric energy when the electric 
load demand is low and releases the energy to the system in 
peak load period, is added up to the system. More detailed of 
the components employed within the proposed MG is provided 
as follows. 
 
Photovoltaic
Wind turbine
BESS
Micro 
turbine
Heat 
recovery
Gas boiler
Absorption 
chiller
+
+
Natural 
gass
Electrical 
load
Cooling 
load
Heating 
load
Electric 
chiller
 
Fig. 1. Proposed MG configuration. 
Page 2 of 9
2023-IASAM23-0015
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Texas at Arlington. Downloaded on June 27,2026 at 06:15:06 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

A. CCHP  
CCHP specifies a system which generates heat, power, and 
cooling all simultaneously using a single power source, like 
biogas, or natural gas. The purpose of CCHP is to enhance 
reliability and stability in MGs, while cutting down the prices 
and greenhouse gas emissions, and improving overall energy 
consumption efficiency. It is worth-mentioning that the CCHP 
is assumed to be working under following hybrid load strategy, 
which considers both heating/cooling and electrical demands. 
Moreover, demands for heating and cooling are satisfied by the 
overall thermal energy produced by power generation unit, AC, 
electrical chiller (EC), and the boiler.  
 
B. Wind Turbine 
The quantity of electrical energy produced by a wind turbine, 
primarily transformed from wind kinetic energy utilizing rotor 
and a generator, is referred to as wind turbine output power. The 
size and layout of the turbine rotor radius (𝑅), air density (𝜌), 
the wind speed (𝑉𝑤), and the generator's conversion efficiency 
(𝐶𝑝) are the factors that affect a wind turbine's output of power. 
The equation is provided as below:  
 
𝑃𝑊𝑇=
1
2 𝜌𝜋𝑅2𝑉𝑤
3𝐶𝑝                                     (1) 
 
C. Photovoltaic 
The output power of a photovoltaic system depends on 
several factors, including the incident irradiance (𝐺𝐼𝑁𝐺), 
maximum power and irradiance at standard test condition (𝑃𝑆𝑇𝐶 
and 𝐺𝑆𝑇𝐶), temperature coefficient (𝑘), module and reference 
temperatures (𝑇𝑐 and 𝑇𝛾). The mathematics can be found as 
follows:  
 
𝑃𝑃𝑉= 𝑃𝑆𝑇𝐶
𝐺𝐼𝑁𝐺
𝐺𝑆𝑇𝐶(1 + 𝑘(𝑇𝑐−𝑇𝛾))                           (2) 
 
D. Micro Turbine 
Micro turbine in a CCHP system produces energy (𝑃𝑀𝑇) by 
combustion of fuel, such as natural gas, or propane. The steam 
or hot water released by the turbine's exhaust can subsequently 
serve for heating purposes or to drive an absorption chiller for 
cooling. By eliminating the requirement for additional boilers 
and chillers, the utilization of waste heat from power generation 
for heating and cooling demands improves the energy 
efficiency and cuts greenhouse gas emissions. Although, MTs 
do have higher initial costs compared to other small-scale 
power generation units like fuel-cells. 
 
E. Battery Energy Storage System 
An energy storage system known as BESS in a microgrid 
serves to store excess energy (𝑃𝑏𝑎𝑡𝑡𝑒𝑟𝑦,𝑐ℎ) provided by the 
microgrid 
for 
future 
consumption 
(𝑃𝑏𝑎𝑡𝑡𝑒𝑟𝑦,𝑑𝑐ℎ). 
The 
microgrid's energy demand and supply are balanced in part by 
the BESS, which can also offer backup power during blackouts. 
The system combined with renewable energy sources improve 
the adaptability and sustainability of MGs. The mathematical 
modeling and limitations of each mentioned units are presented, 
afterwards.  
 
III. PROBLEM FORMULATION 
Power management in an MG can be accomplished by 
making sure that power supply and demand are always 
balanced. This can be quantitatively represented by the 
following equality equation for the system illustrated in Fig. 1. 
Here, the EC power is shown by  𝑃𝐸𝐶, 𝐷𝑒𝑙𝑒𝑐 is the electrical 
demand, 𝑄𝑏𝑜𝑖𝑙𝑒𝑟 and 𝑄𝐴𝐶 represent the boiler and absorption 
chiller capacity, respectively. 𝐻𝑀𝑇 is the recovered heat from 
MT, and 𝑄ℎ𝑢 considered as fed power to the heating unit.   
 
𝑃𝑊𝑇(𝑡) + 𝑃𝑃𝑉(𝑡) + 𝑃𝑀𝑇(𝑡) + 𝑃𝑏𝑎𝑡𝑡𝑒𝑟𝑦,𝑑𝑐ℎ(𝑡) 
−𝑃𝑏𝑎𝑡𝑡𝑒𝑟𝑦,𝑐ℎ(𝑡) −𝑃𝐸𝐶(𝑡) = 𝐷𝑒𝑙𝑒𝑐(𝑡)                      (3) 
 
𝑄𝑏𝑜𝑖𝑙𝑒𝑟−𝑄𝐴𝐶+ 𝐻𝑀𝑇= 𝑄ℎ𝑢                             (4) 
 
𝑄𝐴𝐶.𝐶𝑂𝑃𝐴𝐶+ 𝑃𝐸𝐶. 𝐶𝑂𝑃𝐸𝐶= 𝐷𝑐𝑜𝑜𝑙𝑖𝑛𝑔                      (5) 
 
𝑄ℎ𝑢.𝜂ℎ𝑢= 𝐷ℎ𝑒𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑛𝑔                                   (6) 
 
𝑃𝑀𝑇.
𝜂𝑡ℎ 
𝜂𝑒= 𝐻𝑀𝑇                                      (7) 
 
In (5), the cooling demand is illustrated by 𝐷𝑐𝑜𝑜𝑙𝑖𝑛𝑔 and, 
𝐶𝑂𝑃𝐴𝐶 and 𝐶𝑂𝑃𝐸𝐶 stand for performance coefficients of 
absorption chiller and electric chiller. In (6), and (7) the 𝜂ℎ𝑢 is 
the MT thermal efficiency, 𝜂𝑒 is the MT electrical efficiency, 
and 𝜂ℎ𝑢 presents the heating unit efficiency. 
Then, the overall cost of generating and supplying energy is 
expressed mathematically by the cost function (𝐶𝐹) in power 
management problems. By adopting suitable methodology, the 
optimal solution would be acquired aiming to reduce the cost 
function. Considering that CO2 emissions, which have 
enormous negative effects on the environment and the 
economy, is a significant challenge. A comprehensive and 
robust approach to combat climate change and establish 
sustainable and cost-effective energy systems must include 
minimizing CO2 emission costs, as well. Hence, in this work, a 
cost function is established considering both costs of fuel, and 
CO2 emission. The first objective function demonstrated in (8) 
depends on natural gas consumption by MT and the boiler (𝐹𝑀𝑇, 
and 𝐹𝑏𝑜𝑖𝑙𝑒𝑟). And the 𝐶𝑁𝐺 demonstrates the natural gas price per 
𝑚3. The PV and WT are considered as free energy resources 
and no penalty factors have been assigned to them. The second 
cost function related to the CO2 emission from burning natural 
gas is provided in (11). 
 
𝐶𝐹1 = ∑
(𝐹𝑀𝑇(𝑡) + 𝐹𝑏𝑜𝑖𝑙𝑒𝑟(𝑡)).𝐶𝑁𝐺
24
𝑡=1
                       (8) 
 
Where: 
 
𝐹𝑀𝑇(𝑡) =
𝑃𝑀𝑇(𝑡)
𝜂𝑒
𝛽                                       (9) 
 
𝐹𝑏𝑜𝑖𝑙𝑒𝑟(𝑡) =
𝑄𝑏𝑜𝑖𝑙𝑒𝑟(𝑡)
𝜂𝑏
𝛽                                 (10) 
 
𝐶𝐹2 = ∑
(𝐹𝑀𝑇(𝑡) + 𝐹𝑏𝑜𝑖𝑙𝑒𝑟(𝑡)).𝜇𝐶𝑂2
24
𝑡=1
× 𝜌𝐶𝑂2                     (11) 
 
In these equations, 𝛽 is the conversion factor of the natural 
gas, and 𝜂𝑏 is boiler efficiency. And 𝜇𝐶𝑂2 is the emission 
conversion factor, and 𝜌𝐶𝑂2 is the penalty cost of the emission 
Page 3 of 9
2023-IASAM23-0015
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Texas at Arlington. Downloaded on June 27,2026 at 06:15:06 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

in $/kg. Finally, the total cost function that are aimed to be 
minimized, would be: 
 
𝐶𝐹𝑡𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙= 𝐶𝐹1 + 𝐶𝐹2                                       (12) 
 
Optimizing the cost function in a MG may be subject to a 
number of restrictions and constraints that must be taken into 
account. For the CCHP, the loading of the AC, EC, and the 
boiler must not exceed their rated capacity. So, the CCHP 
constraints considered as follows: 
 
0 ≤𝑄𝐴𝐶(𝑡) ≤𝑄𝐴𝐶𝑚𝑎𝑥(𝑡)                                (13) 
 
0 ≤𝑃𝐸𝐶(𝑡) ≤𝑃𝐸𝐶𝑚𝑎𝑥(𝑡)                                (14) 
 
0 ≤𝑄𝑏𝑜𝑖𝑙𝑒𝑟(𝑡) ≤𝑄𝑏𝑜𝑖𝑙𝑒𝑟𝑚𝑎𝑥(𝑡)                            (15) 
 
For the MT, when an MT’s output power falls below a 
certain level, the efficiency drastically decreases. So: 
 
𝑃𝑀𝑇𝑚𝑖𝑛(𝑡) ≤𝑃𝑀𝑇(𝑡) ≤𝑃𝑀𝑇𝑚𝑎𝑥(𝑡)                         (16) 
 
On the renewable energy resources of PV and WT, the 
constraints are provided, as well. According to the (17) and 
(18), the PV and WT output power can be limited within zero 
and rated generation capacity of the units. 
 
0 ≤𝑃𝑊𝑇≤𝑃𝑊𝑇𝑚𝑎𝑥                                    (17) 
 
0 ≤𝑃𝑃𝑉≤𝑃𝑃𝑉𝑚𝑎𝑥                                     (18) 
 
BESS is a crucial part of power management solutions, as 
was before stated. The following are some restrictions to take 
into account when integrating BESS into power management in 
a microgrid. It should be noted 𝑋𝑐ℎ is 1 when the BESS is being 
charged, and 𝑋𝑑𝑐ℎ is 1 when the BESS is being discharged, 
otherwise they take the 0 value. 
 
0 ≤𝑃𝐵𝐸𝑆𝑆,𝑐ℎ(𝑡) ≤
𝑃𝐵𝐸𝑆𝑆,𝑐ℎ𝑚𝑎𝑥
𝜂𝑐ℎ
. 𝑋𝑐ℎ(𝑡)                    (19) 
 
0 ≤𝑃𝐵𝐸𝑆𝑆,𝑑𝑐ℎ(𝑡) ≤𝑃𝐵𝐸𝑆𝑆,𝑑𝑐ℎ𝑚𝑎𝑥.𝜂𝑐ℎ.𝑋𝑑𝑐ℎ(𝑡)            (20) 
 
𝑋𝑐ℎ(𝑡) + 𝑋𝑑𝑐ℎ(𝑡) ≤1                               (21) 
 
The state of charge (SoC) in a BESS is a crucial factor in 
determining the amount of energy possible to be extracted from 
and the capacity which is still available for future usage. 
Monitoring SoC is crucial to prevent overcharging or 
undercharging, which can impair performance or possibly 
permanently damage the BESS [20]: 
 
𝑞𝐵𝐸𝑆𝑆(𝑡) = 𝑞𝐵𝐸𝑆𝑆(𝑡−1) + 𝑃𝐵𝐸𝑆𝑆,𝑐ℎ(𝑡).𝜂𝑐ℎ−
𝑃𝐵𝐸𝑆𝑆,𝑐ℎ
𝜂𝑐ℎ
        (22) 
 
In which 𝑞𝐵𝐸𝑆𝑆 is the battery energy in 𝑘𝑊ℎ. Moreover, 𝜂𝑐ℎ 
and 𝜂𝑑𝑐ℎ are charging and discharging efficiency of the BESS. 
 
𝑞𝐵𝐸𝑆𝑆𝑚𝑖𝑛≤𝑞𝐵𝐸𝑆𝑆(𝑡) ≤𝑞𝐵𝐸𝑆𝑆𝑚𝑎𝑥                        (23) 
 
∑
𝜂𝑐ℎ.𝑃𝐵𝐸𝑆𝑆,𝑐ℎ(𝑡)
24
𝑡=1
= ∑
𝑃𝐵𝐸𝑆𝑆,𝑑𝑐ℎ(𝑡)
𝜂𝑑𝑐ℎ
24
𝑡=1
                 (24) 
 
The CCHP and BESS parameters considered for the 
suggested MG are provided in TABLE I and TABLE II [21]. 
Typically, the mathematical optimization algorithms are 
implemented to optimize the cost functions. Traditional 
optimization strategies mainly suffer from slower convergence. 
Moreover, the global optimal solution may not be reached. Last 
but not least, non-AI optimization algorithms may have trouble 
dealing with complicated constraints, which can restrict their 
ability to be applied to real-world issues. So, the AI-based 
approaches can come to solve the above-mentioned problems. 
The proposed AI-based methods of predicting WT and PV 
power output, and multi-objective power management 
optimizing in the MG are improved in the next sections.  
 
IV. MULTI-LAYER RECURRENT NEURAL NETWORK 
This study recommends employing multi-layer recurrent 
neural network to foresee short-term WT, PV output power 
generations, in order to accurately adapt to the changing 
weather patterns. The configuration of the model for one layer 
is demonstrated in Fig. 2. The backpropagation procedure 
through the time is also shown in this figure. The 
backpropagation then will be utilized to update the weight 
matrices. According to the figure, the hidden state of ℎ𝑡 can be 
attained as follows. Where, the input at the time of 𝑡 is shown 
by 𝑥𝑡, the recurrent hidden state at the time of 𝑡−1 is 
represented by ℎ𝑡−1. It must be mentioned that the activation 
function 𝜎 is considered to be 𝑡𝑎𝑛ℎ, and the 𝑉 and 𝑊 are the 
weight matrices which should be initialized. It should be noted 
that the bias vector is concatenated to the mentioned matrices. 
 
ℎ𝑡= 𝜎(𝑉𝑥𝑡+ 𝑊ℎ𝑡−1)                                (25) 
 
Then the output can be achieved by: 
 
𝑦𝑡= 𝑉ℎ𝑡                                          (26) 
 
The normalized Root Mean Square Error (nRMSE) is used 
regarding assess the effectiveness of the forecast. In (27), the 
TABLE I: THE CCHP PARAMETERS. 
 
Parameters 
Values (unit) 
Parameters 
Values (unit) 
𝑃𝑀𝑇𝑚𝑎𝑥 
100 (kW) 
𝜂𝑒 
0.5 
𝑃𝑀𝑇𝑚𝑖𝑛 
10 (kW) 
𝜂𝑏 
0.8 
𝑄𝑏𝑜𝑖𝑙𝑒𝑟𝑚𝑎𝑥 
80 (kW) 
𝛽 
0.09043 (𝑚3/𝑘𝑊ℎ) 
𝑄𝐴𝐶𝑚𝑎𝑥 
100 (kW) 
𝐶𝑂𝑃𝐴𝐶 
0.7 
𝑃𝐸𝐶𝑚𝑎𝑥 
100 (kW) 
𝐶𝑂𝑃𝐸𝐶 
3 
𝜂ℎ𝑢 
0.8 
𝐶𝑁𝐺 
0.157 ($/𝑚3) 
𝜂𝑡ℎ  
0.3 
𝜇𝐶𝑂2 × 𝜌𝐶𝑂2 
0.062 ($/𝑚3) 
 
TABLE II: THE BESS PARAMETERS. 
 
Parameters 
Values (unit) 
Parameters 
Values (unit) 
𝑞𝐵𝐸𝑆𝑆𝑚𝑎𝑥 
20 (kWh) 
𝑃𝐵𝐸𝑆𝑆,𝑑𝑐ℎ𝑚𝑎𝑥 
6 (kW) 
𝑞𝐵𝐸𝑆𝑆𝑚𝑖𝑛 
6 (kWh) 
𝜂𝑐ℎ  
85 % 
𝑃𝐵𝐸𝑆𝑆,𝑐ℎ𝑚𝑎𝑥 
6 (kW) 
𝜂𝑑𝑐ℎ  
98 % 
 
Page 4 of 9
2023-IASAM23-0015
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Texas at Arlington. Downloaded on June 27,2026 at 06:15:06 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

predicted and actual values of the WT/PV powers are shown by 
𝑃𝑝𝑟𝑒𝑑 and 𝑃𝑎𝑐𝑡, respectively within 24-hour period.  
  
𝑛𝑅𝑀𝑆𝐸= √
1
24 ∑
(𝑃𝑝𝑟𝑒𝑑−𝑃𝑎𝑐𝑡)
2
24
𝑡=1
                         (27) 
 
The Northern California weather data obtained from NREL 
software called system advisor model (SAM) is utilized to train 
the MLRNN to forecast the 24-hour variable specified. Various 
pre-processing methods exist to enhance the quality of the 
supplied data. Data-scaling will be employed in this case to 
speed up the convergence rate [22]. Where, 𝑥𝑖
(𝑗) expresses the 
𝑖𝑡ℎ  feature of the 𝑗𝑡ℎ sample. Furthermore, 𝜇𝑖
(𝑗) is the mean, and 
the 𝜎𝑖
(𝑗) demonstrates the standard deviation, accordingly. 
 
𝑥𝑖
(𝑗) =
(𝑥𝑖
(𝑗)−𝜇𝑖
(𝑗))
𝜎𝑖
(𝑗)
                                       (28) 
 
A methodology termed the optimizer requires then to modify 
the weights of an AI learning model. As a consequence, it 
assists in reducing overall losses and enhances the model 
accuracy. Mini-batch stochastic gradient descent (MGD) is 
used as the optimizer in this investigation. In this regard, instead 
of all the samples, just a small batch of data is collected thus in 
each iteration to update the weights [23]. 
According to the proposed model, there are two hyper 
parameters of number of layers in MLRNN and step size of the 
MGD. The traditional methods like Bayesian or trial and error 
methods result in the non-optimal selection of these 
hyperparameters. This may cause lower prediction accuracy, or 
even response divergence. Hence, in this study, a grid-search 
method is used for the hyperparameters tuning. To do so, 10% 
of the samples are randomly selected as the validation dataset, 
and the model is run through the parameters’ grid. Afterwards, 
the combination of the hyperparameters which results in the 
best performance will be obtained, and then will be used in 
training and testing process.  
After highly-accurate prediction of the uncertain renewable 
resources, optimal power management should be conducted to 
minimize the pre-defined multi-objective cost function, based 
on predicted output power capabilities of the renewable energy 
resources. The subject is covered in next section. 
 
V. MULTI-AGENT REINFORCEMENT LEARNING 
 Traditionally, learning an optimum control strategy entails 
modeling a single agent RL techniques. Upwards of one 
learning agent interacts with the environment, in a multi-agent 
RL model. MG power management systems are growing in past 
few years. Consequently, single-agent algorithms seem to be 
less effective. Hence, MARL may come to work. Here, a 
MARL model is proposed to minimze the fuel and CO2 
emission costs for the MG provided in Fig. 1 to have a 
economical and environment-friendly power management 
amongst the generation units.  
In this case, a stochastic game is applied to describe a multi-
agent decision-making process. Hence, the strategy requires 
many parameter defenitions. Here, the 𝑁 stands for number of 
agents, 𝑆 shows the set of states which is shared amongst the 
agents, 𝐴𝑖 represents the set of actions regarding to the agent 𝑖. 
Moreover, the probability of the transition from one state (𝑠∈
𝑆) to another state (𝑠′ ∈𝑆) is defined by 𝑃: 𝑆× 𝐴. And reward 
function which demonstrates the value for the agent 𝑖, 
tranmitted from (𝑠, 𝑎) to 𝑠′. At the time of 𝑡 the state and 
𝑖𝑡ℎ agent actoin are illustrated by 𝑠𝑡 and 𝑎𝑡
𝑖, respectively. The 
environment is changing into the subsequent state as a result of 
collective actions from all agents, showing by 𝑠𝑡+1~𝑃(. |𝑠𝑡, 𝑎𝑡). 
Afterwards, the reward 𝑅𝑖(𝑠𝑡, 𝑎𝑡, 𝑠𝑡+1) of the agents will be 
determined. It means each agent’s target is to find a policy of 
𝜋𝑖 to traverse a sequential actions to maximize the discounted 
cumulative reward, stated below: 
  
𝑉𝜋𝑖(𝑠) = 𝔼𝑠𝑡+1~𝑃(.|𝑠𝑡,𝑎𝑡),   𝑎−𝑖~𝜋−𝑖(.|𝑠𝑡)[ℛ]                      (29) 
 
In which: 
 
ℛ= ∑
𝛾𝑡𝑅𝑡
𝑖(𝑠𝑡,𝑎𝑡,𝑠𝑡+1)|𝑎𝑖~𝜋𝑖(. |𝑠𝑡)
𝑡≥0
                      (30) 
 
It must be mentioned that in (29), 𝔼 is the expectation, and 
the superscript of −𝑖 demonstrates all other 𝑁−1 agents. On 
the other hand, in (30), 𝛾𝑡 is the discount factor that represents 
the value of time and is valued between [0, 1]. 
Thus, each agent must undertake strategic approaches while 
taking into account other agents while establishing the policies 
in order to solve a stochastic game and actually maximize the 
cumulative reward. To fulfill the aforementioned requirements, 
this study will employ Q-learning value-based MARL. The 𝑄-
learning which is considered as a value-based MARL offers 
several advantages over policy-based approaches. First, value-
based methods tend to be simpler and easier to implement 
compared to policy-based methods, making them more scalable 
and suitable for complex multi-agent environments. Second, 
value-based MARL algorithms are often more sample-efficient, 
requiring fewer interactions with the environment to converge 
to optimal or near-optimal policies. Third, value-based methods 
excel at balancing exploration and exploitation, guiding agents 
to 
select 
actions 
that 
maximize 
long-term 
rewards. 
Furthermore, value-based approaches are well-suited for mixed 
cooperative-competitive scenarios, as they focus on estimating 
the value of state-action pairs without explicitly modeling the 
policies of other agents. These advantages make the proposed 
t-1
t
t+1
xt-1
xt
x t+1
yt-1
yt
yt+1
V
W
 
Fig. 2. The configuration of the MLRNN for one layer. 
Page 5 of 9
2023-IASAM23-0015
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Texas at Arlington. Downloaded on June 27,2026 at 06:15:06 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

MARL method a powerful and effective choice for power 
management problems. 
To achieve so, the Q function will be updated as follows, in 
the iteration of 𝑡 for the 𝑖𝑡ℎ agent: 
 
𝑄𝑖(𝑠𝑡,𝑎𝑡)𝑢𝑝𝑑𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑑= 𝑄𝑖(𝑠𝑡,𝑎𝑡) +    
𝛼(𝑅𝑖+ 𝛾. 𝑒𝑣𝑎𝑙𝑖({𝑄𝑖(𝑠𝑡+1, . )}𝑖∈{1,…,𝑁}) −𝑄𝑖(𝑠𝑡,𝑎𝑡))        (31) 
 
In (31), the term 𝑣𝑎𝑙𝑖({𝑄𝑖(𝑠𝑡+1, . )}𝑖∈{1,…,𝑁}) demonstrates 
that each of the agent consideres both itself and all other agents’ 
interest. Afterwards, the optimized policy will be attained, as 
follows: 
 
𝑆𝑜𝑙𝑣𝑒𝑖({𝑄𝑖(𝑠𝑡+1, . )}𝑖∈{1,…,𝑁}) = 𝜋𝑖                       (32) 
 
Finally: 
 
        𝑒𝑣𝑎𝑙𝑖({𝑄𝑖(𝑠𝑡+1,. )}𝑖∈{1,…,𝑁}) =    
𝑉𝑖(𝑠𝑡+1,{𝑆𝑜𝑙𝑣𝑒𝑖({𝑄𝑖(𝑠𝑡+1, . )}𝑖∈{1,…,𝑁})}
𝑖∈{1,…,𝑁})          (33) 
 
The SoC of the BESS, MT, WT, and PV output power, as 
well as the time of day ℎ(𝑡), are taken into consideration when 
operating the MG. Hence, the state space is therefore described 
as follows for this study. Relying on the state information of the 
suggested MG, the agent can provide decision commands for 
the generation units and the BESS at each dispatching time. The 
action 
space 
has 
three 
potential 
states: 
idle 
(0), 
increase/charging (1), and decrease/discharging (2). 
 
𝑠𝑡= {𝑃𝑃𝑉,𝑃𝑃𝑉,𝑃𝑀𝑇,𝑃𝐵𝐸𝑆𝑆,ℎ(𝑡)},𝑠𝑡∈𝑆                     (34) 
 
Both proposed method for MLRNN-based renewable energy 
resources 
output 
prediction and 
MARL-based 
power 
management in the MG have been discussed, so far. The 
outcomes and the interpretation are provided in the next section. 
 
VI. SIMULATION RESULTS 
MLRNN has been applied to forecast WT and PV output 
power, and the findings are impressively accurate. The 
MLRNN prediction model is trained from historical data and 
therefore can take into consideration the dynamic and nonlinear 
features of renewable energy resources to provide precise 
predictions of the 24-hour power output. The Northern 
California weather data from NREL software called SAM has 
been utilized for the training process. Grid-search has been 
employed for optimal auto-tuning of the hyperparameters. In 
this regard, 10% of the data has been assigned as the validation 
data set for the mentioned purpose. It should be mentioned that 
Fig. 5. Predicted and actual values of the generated power from WT in 24 hours.
10
50
100
Accuracy (%)
100
200
300
400
500
600
10 Epochs
20 Epochs
30 Epochs
Iterations
Training (smoothed)
Training
Validation
Fig. 4. The accuracy trend in MLRNN training process. 
 
(a) 
(b) 
Fig. 3. Grid-search 3-D plots to find optimum hyperparameters of; (a) WT output power prediction, (b) PV output power prediction. 
 
Fig. 6. Predicted and actual values of the generated power from PV in 24 hours.
Page 6 of 9
2023-IASAM23-0015
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Texas at Arlington. Downloaded on June 27,2026 at 06:15:06 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

for the grid-search, the domain for two hyperparameters of 
number of hidden layers in MLRNN and the step size of the 
MGD are considered to be between [1, 8] and [10−3, 10], 
accordingly. To have visual understanding of the grid-search, 
the 3-D plots, which show the optimal hyperparameter values 
to have minimized nRMSE cost function for both WT and PV 
power output predictions are presented in Fig. 3. According to 
the fig. 3(a), the optimum hyperparameters of the WT output 
power prediction is calculated to be 4 hidden layers with the 
MGD step size of 0.03 for updating the weights. On the other 
hand, Fig. 3(b) demonstrates 3 layers and step size of 0.48 as 
the optimized hyperparameter values for the PV. Based on the 
defined parameters the proposed model has been trained on 
70% of the dataset, using backpropagation optimized by MGD. 
A batch of 64 data has been utilized to update the parameters, 
in each cycle. And 30 epochs each of which contains 20 
iterations have been assigned for MLRNN model training. As 
mentioned, to enhance the accuracy and convergence rate, the 
data has been preprocessed and shuffled, beforehand. To have 
a clear overview of accuracy behavior during the training in 30 
epochs, Fig. 4 is drawn for WT output prediction. The 
characteristic is almost the same for the PV one. After 
successful training, the rest of the 20% data which is known as 
testing data set, has been applied to the trained model for 
predicting the WT and PV output power. The results are 
provided in Fig. 5 and Fig. 6, respectively. As can be seen from 
the figures, 24 actual and corresponding prediction samples are 
demonstrated to validate the accurate performance of the 
proposed model on unseen test data set. It should be mentioned 
that the accuracies on test data set for WT and PV output power 
prediction are measured to be 96.06% and 98.32%, accordingly. 
The summary of proposed MLRNN parameters explained 
above, are gathered in TABLE III. Moreover, the 24-hour WT 
and PV output power capabilities are shown in TABLE IV, and 
TABLE V.  
As the next step, proposed MARL algorithm is tested on the 
MG to validate the robust economic power flow performance 
of the method. Electrical, heating, and cooling demands are 
pictured in Fig. 7. Four agents have been assigned to find the 
optimal solution for the developed cost function in (12). The 
main objective of these agents is to overcome the challenging 
issue of finding the optimum operation points in a complicated 
environment with only one agent, by combining the simpler 
tasks that each agent does. And the discount factor is chosen to 
be 0.9. The dispatch results are provided in Fig. 8, contains the 
generation units’ output power within a 24-hour period. 
According to the figure, it can be deduced that MT has been 
assigned mainly to feed heating and cooling demands, due to 
the natural gas price. And the WT and PV in high demand 
periods operate near their maximum power generation 
capability. The MT minimum output power was defined to be 
10% of the rated capacity. So, in low demand hours, MT has 
worked at its minimum operation point which is 10 𝑘𝑊. The 
mentioned observation can validate proper functionality of 
proposed MARL to have an economical and optimal power 
management. And based on fuel price and CO2 emission cost, 
total cost for the acquired power management among the 
generation units attained to be almost 241$. 
TABLE IV: WT PREDICTED OUTPUT POWER CAPABILITY. 
 
Hour 
WT (kW) 
Hour 
WT (kW) 
Hour 
WT (kW) 
1 
57.2 
9 
29.5 
17 
34.4 
2 
58.5 
10 
28.6 
18 
26.8 
3 
61.3 
11 
29.1 
19 
46.5 
4 
65.0 
12 
18.4 
20 
51.1 
5 
36.7 
13 
16.2 
21 
36.3 
6 
17.5 
14 
36.9 
22 
36.7 
7 
32.1 
15 
48.9 
23 
33.0 
8 
33.2 
16 
45.3 
24 
25.2 
TABLE V: PV PREDICTED OUTPUT POWER CAPABILITY. 
 
Hour 
PV (kW) 
Hour 
PV (kW) 
Hour 
PV (kW) 
1 
0 
9 
36.6 
17 
391 
2 
0 
10 
55.4 
18 
2.2 
3 
0 
11 
62.7 
19 
1.6 
4 
0 
12 
65.3 
20 
0 
5 
0 
13 
65.7 
21 
0 
6 
0 
14 
65.9 
22 
0 
7 
1.0 
15 
62.4 
23 
0 
8 
2.1 
16 
56.0 
24 
0 
 
Fig. 7. Electrical, heating, and cooling loads profile. 
 
Fig. 8. The generation units’ managed output power. 
TABLE III: SUMMARY OF THE PROPOSED MLRNN PARAMETERS. 
 
WT 
RNN layers 
4 
Optimizer 
MGD 
MGD step size 
0.03 
Batch size 
64 
Epochs 
30 
Iteration 
20 × 30 
Test accuracy 
96.06% 
PV 
RNN layers 
3 
Optimizer 
MGD 
MGD step size 
0.48 
Batch size 
128 
Epochs 
30 
Iteration 
20 × 30 
Test accuracy 
98.32% 
Page 7 of 9
2023-IASAM23-0015
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Texas at Arlington. Downloaded on June 27,2026 at 06:15:06 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

 Moreover, the charging states of the BESS in 24 hours is 
illustrated in Fig. 9. It is worth mentioning that the initial BESS 
charge is considered to be 10 𝑘𝑊 at 1:00 am. Clearly, at the 
times that the generation units could not meet the electrical 
demand, the battery has been discharged to the load, with the 
maximum step of 6 𝑘𝑊. On the other hand, it is planned to 
recharge the battery at the first possible moment with the 
maximum step of 6 𝑘𝑊, as well. 
A comprehensive comparison amongst previously-studied 
RL-based power management approaches and the proposed one 
is shown in TABLE VI.  
 
VII. CONCLUSION 
   In order to overcome the obstacles in micro-grid power 
management, 
recurrent 
neural 
networks 
along 
with 
reinforcement learning method was proposed in this work. The 
projected MG included a battery energy storage system, wind 
turbine, photovoltaic, and combined cooling, heating, and 
power systems. A multi-layer recurrent neural network model 
was developed and trained using historical wind and solar 
dependent factors dataset to efficiently estimate the generation 
of day-ahead renewable WT and PV resources. The strategy 
featured advantages over previously investigated methods, 
including better accuracy and the enhanced ability to extract 
non-linear mapping functions between the input and output. To 
improve the model, the hyperparameters of number of hidden 
layers and step size for wights updating were auto-tunned via 
the grid-search. The anticipated values would subsequently be 
used in the following phase, which was the optimal power 
management throughout MG's generation units. In order to 
achieve a dependable and environmentally friendly MG, a 
model free reinforcement learning was used to maintain the 
multi-objective fuel and CO2 emission cost function minimized. 
Hence, a multi-agent RL approach was suggested to cope with 
the task. By integrating the smaller tasks that each agent 
performed, 
multi-agent 
solutions 
aimed to 
solve 
the 
complicated issue of discovering the best operating points in 
the challenging environment, rather than only one agent. The 
results demonstrated that the proposed MARL successfully 
distributed the power generation amongst micro turbines 
in CCHP system and other renewable resources. The outcomes 
also confirmed that the proposed MG's BESS performed 
properly under both light and heavy load conditions within a 
day. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] GWEC's 16th flagship Global Wind Report 2021. 
[2] F. Delfino, G. Ferro, M. Robba and M. Rossi, "An Energy Management 
Platform for the Optimal Control of Active and Reactive Powers in 
Sustainable Microgrids," in IEEE Transactions on Industry Applications, 
vol. 55, no. 6, pp. 7146-7156, 2019. 
[3] F. Yang, X. Feng and Z. Li, "Advanced Microgrid Energy Management 
System for Future Sustainable and Resilient Power Grid," IEEE Trans. on 
Industry Applications, vol. 55, no. 6, pp. 7251-7260, Nov.-Dec. 2019. 
[4] W. Shi, X. Xie, C. -C. Chu and R. Gadh, "Distributed Optimal Energy 
Management in Microgrids," in IEEE Transactions on Smart Grid, vol. 6, 
no. 3, pp. 1137-1146, May 2015.  
TABLE VI: SUMMARY OF THE REVIEWED OPTIMAL POWER MANAGEMENT STRATEGIES 
 
References 
Strategy 
Objective function 
Strength 
Deficiency 
[24] 
Q-Learning 
 Optimal power flow in a MG 
 Simple implementation 
 High-sensitivity to hyperparameters 
 Slow convergence 
 Lack of generalization 
 Curse of dimensionality 
[25] 
Bayesian-RL 
 Power management 
 Battery operation control 
 Faster convergence than Q-learning 
 Data efficiency 
 Computationally expensive 
 Probability of overfitting 
 Inaccurate for complex system 
 High-sensitivity to hyperparameters 
[26] 
DQN 
 Power management in a MG 
 Battery operation control 
 Handles higher dimensional state spaces 
 Better performance in complex system 
than Bayesian-RL  
 Slow to converge 
 Require large training dataset 
 highly susceptible to overestimation 
[27] 
Actor-critic 
RL 
 Power management 
 Better convergence rate 
 Handle both continuous and discrete 
systems 
 Sensitivity to hyperparameters 
 Exploration problem 
 Hard Bias and variance trade-off 
 Probability of instability 
[28] 
Transfer RL 
 Power management considering 
hybrid electric vehicles 
 Improved and accurate performance 
 Less training time 
 extend the applicability to new and 
more complex tasks 
 Probability of overfitting 
 Difficulty in choosing source tasks 
 Computationally expensive 
Proposed 
MARL 
 Optimal power flow in a MG 
 Minimizing CO2 emission cost 
 Fast convergence rate 
 Accurate for complex system 
 versatile approach 
 perfect exploration amongst all RL-
based approach 
 Communication Overhead 
 Challenging training 
Fig. 9. The BESS energy. 
Page 8 of 9
2023-IASAM23-0015
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Texas at Arlington. Downloaded on June 27,2026 at 06:15:06 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

[5] C. Cecati, C. Citro and P. Siano, "Combined Operations of Renewable 
Energy Systems and Responsive Demand in a Smart Grid," in IEEE 
Transactions on Sustainable Energy, vol. 2, no. 4, pp. 468-476, Oct. 2011. 
[6] S. A. Pourmousavi, M. H. Nehrir, C. M. Colson and C. Wang, "Real-Time 
Energy Management of a Stand-Alone Hybrid Wind-Microturbine Energy 
System Using Particle Swarm Optimization," in IEEE Transactions on 
Sustainable Energy, vol. 1, no. 3, pp. 193-201, Oct. 2010. 
[7] P. Siano, C. Cecati, H. Yu and J. Kolbusz, "Real Time Operation of Smart 
Grids via FCN Networks and Optimal Power Flow," in IEEE Transactions 
on Industrial Informatics, vol. 8, no. 4, pp. 944-952, Nov. 2012. 
[8] G. Mohy-ud-din, K. M. Muttaqi and D. Sutanto, "Adaptive and Predictive 
Energy Management Strategy for Real-Time Optimal Power Dispatch 
From VPPs Integrated With Renewable Energy and Energy Storage," 
in IEEE Transactions on Industry Applications, vol. 57, no. 3, pp. 1958-
1972, May-June 2021. 
9j] P. Zeng, H. Li, H. He and S. Li, "Dynamic Energy Management of a 
Microgrid Using Approximate Dynamic Programming and Deep Recurrent 
Neural Network Learning," in IEEE Transactions on Smart Grid, vol. 10, 
no. 4, pp. 4435-4445, July 2019. 
[10] C. Liu, C. Lee, H. Chen and S. Mehrotra, "Stochastic Robust Mathematical 
Programming Model for Power System Optimization," in IEEE 
Transactions on Power Systems, vol. 31, no. 1, pp. 821-822, Jan. 2016. 
[11] F. Hafiz, M. A. Awal, A. R. d. Queiroz and I. Husain, "Real-Time 
Stochastic Optimization of Energy Storage Management Using Deep 
Learning-Based Forecasts for Residential PV Applications," in IEEE 
Transactions on Industry Applications, vol. 56, no. 3, pp. 2216-2226, May-
June 2020. 
[12] Y. Du and F. Li, "Intelligent Multi-Microgrid Energy Management Based 
on Deep Neural Network and Model-Free Reinforcement Learning," 
in IEEE Trans. on Smart Grid, vol. 11, no. 2, pp. 1066-1076, March 2020. 
[13] Y. Zheng, S. Li and R. Tan, "Distributed Model Predictive Control for On-
Connected Microgrid Power Management," in IEEE Transactions on 
Control Systems Technology, vol. 26, no. 3, pp. 1028-1039, May 2018. 
[14] F. Delfino, G. Ferro, M. Robba and M. Rossi, "An Energy Management 
Platform for the Optimal Control of Active and Reactive Powers in 
Sustainable Microgrids," in IEEE Transactions on Industry Applications, 
vol. 55, no. 6, pp. 7146-7156, Nov.-Dec. 2019. 
[15] Z. Zhao et al., "Distributed Robust Model Predictive Control-Based 
Energy Management Strategy for Islanded Multi-Microgrids Considering 
Uncertainty," in IEEE Transactions on Smart Grid, vol. 13, no. 3, pp. 2107-
2120, May 2022. 
[16] [7] M. Marzband, M. Ghadimi, A. Sumper, and J. L. Domínguez-Garcíac, 
“Experimental validation of a real-time energy management system using 
multi-period gravitational search algorithm for microgrids,” Appl. Energy, 
vol. 128, pp. 164–174, 2014. 
[17] K. Roy, K. K. Mandal, and A. C. Mandal, “Modeling and managing of 
micro grid connected system using improved artificial bee colony 
algorithm,” Int. J. Elect. Power Energy Syst., vol. 75, pp. 50–58, 2016. 
[18] T. Sadeq, M. Rezkallah, A. Chandra, Z. Feger, H. Ibrahim and J. -F. 
Savard, "Real-Time Power Management Strategy based on Fuzzy Logic 
Controller and Human-Computer Interface for DC Off-Grid System," 2020 
IEEE Industry Applications Society Annual Meeting, Detroit, MI, USA, 
pp. 1-6, 2020. 
[19] M. G. M. Abdolrasol, R. Mohamed, M. A. Hannan, A. Q. Al-Shetwi, M. 
Mansor and F. Blaabjerg, "Artificial Neural Network Based Particle Swarm 
Optimization for Microgrid Optimal Energy Scheduling," in IEEE 
Transactions on Power Electronics, vol. 36, no. 11, pp. 12151-12157, Nov. 
2021. 
[20] X. Hu, D. Cao, and B. Egardt, "Condition monitoring in advanced battery 
management systems: moving horizon estimation using a reduced 
electrochemical model," IEEE/ASME Transactions on Mechatronics, vol. 
23, pp. 167-178, 2018. 
[21] F. Brahman, M. Honarmand, and S. Jadid, "Optimal electrical and thermal 
energy management of a residential energy hub, integrating demand 
response and energy storage system," Energy and Buildings, vol. 90, pp. 
65-75, 2015. 
[22] M. N. Uddin and Y. H. Tabrizi, "Artificial Intelligence Based Control 
Strategy of a Three-Phase Neutral-Point Clamped Back-to-Back Power 
Converter with Ensured Power Quality for WECS," 2022 IEEE Industry 
Applications Society Annual Meeting (IAS), Detroit, MI, USA, 2022. 
[23] X. Peng, L. Li and F. -Y. Wang, "Accelerating Minibatch Stochastic 
Gradient Descent Using Typicality Sampling," in IEEE Transactions on 
Neural Networks and Learning Systems, vol. 31, no. 11, pp. 4649-4659, 
Nov. 2020.  
[24] E. Foruzan, L.-K. Soh, and S. Asgarpoor, ‘‘Reinforcement learning 
approach for optimal distributed energy management in a microgrid,’’ 
IEEE Trans. Power Syst., vol. 33, no. 5, pp. 5749–5758, Sep. 2018. 
[25] G. Shi, D. Liu, and Q. Wei, ‘‘Echo state network-based Q-learning method 
for optimal battery control of offices combined with renewable energy,’’ 
IET Control Theory Appl., vol. 11, no. 7, pp. 915–922, Apr. 2017. 
[26] Y. Ji, J. Wang, J. Xu, X. Fang, and H. Zhang, ‘‘Real-time energy 
management of a microgrid using deep reinforcement learning,’’ Energies, 
vol. 12, no. 12, p. 2291, Jun. 2019. 
[27] Y. Wei, Z. Zhang, F. R. Yu, and Z. Han, ‘‘Power allocation in HetNets 
with hybrid energy supply using actor-critic reinforcement learning,’’ in 
Proc. IEEE Global Commun. Conf., pp. 1–5, 2017. 
[28] R. Lian, H. Tan, J. Peng, Q. Li and Y. Wu, "Cross-Type Transfer for Deep 
Reinforcement Learning Based Hybrid Electric Vehicle Energy 
Management," in IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology, vol. 69, no. 
8, pp. 8367-8380, Aug. 2020. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 9 of 9
2023-IASAM23-0015
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Texas at Arlington. Downloaded on June 27,2026 at 06:15:06 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
