Distributionally Robust Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning for
Dynamic Chute Mapping
Guangyi Liu1, Suzan Iloglu1, Michael Caldara1, Joseph W. Durham1, and Michael M. Zavlanos1,2
Abstract
In Amazon robotic warehouses, the destination-to-chute mapping problem is crucial for efficient
package sorting. Often, however, this problem is complicated by uncertain and dynamic package
induction rates, which can lead to increased package recirculation. To tackle this challenge, we introduce
a Distributionally Robust Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning (DRMARL) framework that learns a
destination-to-chute mapping policy that is resilient to adversarial variations in induction rates. Specifically,
DRMARL relies on group distributionally robust optimization (DRO) to learn a policy that performs
well not only on average but also on each individual subpopulation of induction rates within the group
that capture, for example, different seasonality or operation modes of the system. This approach is then
combined with a novel contextual bandit-based predictor of the worst-case induction distribution for
each state-action pair, significantly reducing the cost of exploration and thereby increasing the learning
efficiency and scalability of our framework. Extensive simulations demonstrate that DRMARL achieves
robust chute mapping in the presence of varying induction distributions, reducing package recirculation
by an average of 80% in the simulation scenario.
1
Introduction
In Amazon robotic sortation warehouses, mobile robots are deployed to transport and sort packages efficiently
to different destinations [1, 2, 3, 4, 5]. The sorting process begins at induction stations, where packages are
loaded onto mobile robots and subsequently transported to designated eject chutes based on their destinations
(Figure 1). A critical factor determining the package throughput capacity of these facilities is the effective
allocation of eject chutes to different destinations. Therefore, the destination-to-chute mapping policy plays a
crucial role in optimizing the overall throughput performance of the robotic sortation warehouse.
Our previous work [6] addresses the destination assignment problem (DAP) [7] in robotic sorting systems
by developing a dynamic chute mapping policy. This policy determines the optimal allocation of eject chutes
to destinations with the objective of minimizing the number of unsorted packages. We proposed a model-free
reinforcement learning approach that dynamically adjusts the number of chutes assigned to each destination
throughout the day. Our solution formulates the chute mapping problem within a Multi-Agent Reinforcement
Learning (MARL) framework [8, 9, 10, 11], where each destination is represented as an agent that controls
its chute allocation at each time step.
While the MARL policy proposed in our previous work [6] demonstrates superior performance compared
to traditional reactive chute mapping approaches often implemented in Amazon robotic sortation warehouses,
its effectiveness assumes the induction distribution during deployment matches the training distribution and
1G.
Liu,
S.
Iloglu,
M.
Caldara,
J.
W.
Durham,
and
M.
M.
Zavlanos
are
with
Amazon
Robotics
{gyliu,siloglu,caldaram,josepdur,miczavla}@amazon.com.
2M.
M.
Zavlanos
is
with
Department
of
Mechanical
Engineering
and
Materials
Science,
Duke
University.
{michael.zavlanos}@duke.edu.
1
arXiv:2503.09755v1  [cs.LG]  12 Mar 2025

Figure 1: Schematic layout of an Amazon robotic sortation warehouse featuring eject chutes.
the daily induction rate stays close to its average value. In practice, however, induction patterns exhibit
significant temporal variations, potentially compromising the MARL policy’s performance when confronted
with unexpected distribution changes.
To enhance robustness against such variations, in this paper, we propose a Distributionally Robust
Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning (DRMARL) framework that develops chute mapping policies capable
of maintaining near-optimal performance across diverse induction distributions. Specifically, we formulate
this problem as a group DRO problem, where each group represents a distinct induction distribution pattern
extracted from a subset of a historical dataset. Our DRMARL framework optimizes policies for the worst-
case induction patterns across these distribution groups. To address the computational cost of exhaustively
evaluating all distribution groups during training, we introduce a contextual bandit (CB)-based worst-case
reward predictor for each state-action pair. Through extensive evaluation, we demonstrate that our DRMARL
framework yields robust chute mapping policies that not only outperform baseline MARL policies on out-
of-distribution (OOD) induction data but also maintain consistent performance across varying induction
distributions.
Our contributions are twofold: First, we introduce group distributionally robust optimization in multi-
agent reinforcement learning, developing a novel framework to learn policies that are robust to distribution
shifts. Second, we propose an innovative contextual bandit-based method for efficient worst-case reward
prediction, significantly reducing the computational complexity of DRMARL training by eliminating the need
for exhaustive group exploration to learn the worst-case reward. To the best of our knowledge, our framework
is the first to integrate contextual bandits with group DRO and MARL, addressing a well-known challenge of
distributionally robust reinforcement learning related to its computational cost. Our proposed framework
has broad applicability to various large-scale industrial applications, beyond sortation systems, including
resource allocation, collaborative robotics, and warehouse automation, where robustness to distribution shifts
is crucial.
1.1
Literature Review
Destination Assignment Problems: Mathematical programming has been used to optimize warehouse systems,
including destination assignment problems (DAP) [7] for sorting systems. The destination mapping approach
in [12] optimizes package flow by minimizing travel distances between inbound and outbound stations
in conveyor-based sorting systems, leading to improved throughput. [13] minimizes the worst-case flow
imbalance across work stations on the sortation floor, developing a stochastic approach with chance and
robust constraints. For robotic sorting systems, [14] proposes an integer programming method to solve
DAPs that minimize sortation effort and satisfy package deadlines. A robust formulation addressing demand
2

uncertainty is presented in [15]. While these approaches effectively optimize destination assignment in sorting
systems, they do not account for distributional uncertainty in demand and system dynamics. In contrast, our
proposed DRMARL framework explicitly models such uncertainties, ensuring robust performance under
varying operational conditions.
MARL for Resource Allocation: MARL has previously been applied to address resource allocation problems
[16, 17, 18]. For example, a MARL framework for ocean transportation networks was proposed in [19]. This
framework develops a multi-agent Q-learning algorithm where the local Q-networks depend on the joint
states (including the limited shared resources) and the joint actions. However, since the joint state-action
space grows exponentially with the number of agents, the local Q-networks are hard to learn and this approach
does not scale well in practice. This limitation was addressed in our previous work [6], where the local
Q-networks are only loosely coupled, enhancing the scalability while still being interconnected enough
to capture the impact of robot congestion on the sortation floor. Compared to [19], the method proposed
in [6] models resources explicitly as actions and considers budget constraints when taking joint actions.
However, these MARL-based approaches do not incorporate distributional robustness, making them sensitive
to demand fluctuations and uncertainty, which our DRMARL framework explicitly addresses to ensure
reliable performance in dynamic sorting environments.
Robust and Distributionally Robust RL: Robust Reinforcement Learning (Robust RL) [20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25]
develops policies that maintain performance under worst-case conditions through adversarial perturbations.
Distributionally Robust Reinforcement Learning (DRRL) [26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32] extends this by
optimizing across environment distributions rather than single worst-case scenarios. While traditional
DRRL primarily addresses ambiguity in MDP transition probabilities, this approach inadequately captures
induction distribution changes in Amazon robotic sortation warehouses. Our problem requires focus on
distributionally robust optimization of reward function distributions, building on [33, 34]. Recent advances in
(Distributionally) Robust Multi-Agent RL [35, 36, 37, 38] have introduced frameworks like RMGs, ERNIE,
and DRNVI to address environmental uncertainties, adversarial dynamics, and model uncertainties. While
existing methods primarily focus on robustness in transition dynamics, adversarial interactions, and general
environmental uncertainties, they do not explicitly address distributional shifts in package induction, which
is a critical challenge in sortation warehouses. Our approach extends DRMARL to explicitly model and
optimize against uncertainties in induction distributions, ensuring robust and consistent performance under
varying operational conditions.
Group DRO: Group Distributionally Robust Optimization aims to enhance model robustness across diverse
subpopulations by optimizing for the worst-performing groups rather than average performance [39]. This
approach ensures fairness and resilience to distribution shifts, particularly for underrepresented groups.
While initial work focused on single-agent supervised learning [40, 41], recent advances have extended
these principles to more complex settings. Notably, [42] provided a soft-weighting method on distribution
groups with convergence guarantees, while [43] and [44] demonstrated the applicability of group DRO in
multi-agent systems and reinforcement learning, respectively. Our work bridges a critical gap by introducing
group DRO principles to DRMARL. We begin by formulating the distributionally robust Bellman operator
and addressing the computational challenges of exploring all distribution groups during the training. To
tackle these challenges, we provide a DR Bellman operator specifically designed for MARL and introduce a
contextual bandit (CB)-based worst-case distribution group predictor. This predictor enables efficient training
by adaptively identifying the worst-case distribution groups.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we formulate the dynamic chute
mapping problem within a multi-agent reinforcement learning framework. In Section 3 we extend this
formulation by incorporating group distributionally robust optimization into MARL, while in Section 4 we
present our novel contextual bandit-based worst-case reward predictor to enhance training efficiency. Finally,
in Section 5, we demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed framework through extensive simulations. All
3

Figure 2: Flow of packages in the Amazon robotic sortation warehouse.
theoretical proofs are provided in Appendix A.
2
Problem Formulation
In Amazon robotic sortation warehouses, package flow is modeled using three buffers: induct, laden drive,
and recirculation, as illustrated in Figure 2. The laden drive buffer represents packages currently being
transported by robots to eject chutes. Due to the limited chute capacity, insufficient chute allocation for a
destination can lead to sortation bottlenecks. When this occurs, excess packages from the laden drive buffer
are redirected by robots to recirculation chutes, entering the recirculation buffer for reprocessing through the
sortation system. Eject chutes can be reallocated under two conditions: when the destination vehicle reaches
capacity or when the transportation schedule deadline is met. The dynamic chute mapping policy aims to
optimize chute allocation across destinations, minimizing recirculation buffer volume while maximizing the
system throughput.
2.1
MARL Structure
We formulate the dynamic chute mapping problem as a sequential decision making problem; specifically, a
MARL problem that determines optimal chute allocations to minimize package recirculation at each time
step. To do so, we define a Markov game over N agents (unique destinations) by the tuple
 N, S, {Oi}N
i=1, {Ai}N
i=1, P, {ri}N
i=1, γ, ρ0

, where:
(a) Agents: N agents, each corresponding to a unique destination.
(b) State Space: S denotes the joint state space.
(c) Observation Space: For each agent i, Oi ⊂S represents its local observation at each time step,
consisting of:
– Number of packages recirculated until time t for agent i
– Total number of available chutes that can be assigned (uniform across all agents)
– Number of chutes currently assigned to agent i
(d) Action Space: For each agent i, Ai represents its action space, determining the number of new chutes
required. Actions take values in [0, 10], where an action value a indicates the assignment of a new
chutes to agent i at that time step. The joint action space is defined as A = QN
i=1 Ai.
4

(e) Transition Probability: P : S × A × S × X →[0, 1] specifies the probability of packages being
either sorted by chutes or sent to the recirculation buffer. In the large-scale Amazon robotic sortation
warehouse setting, the transition probability is a function of the induction distribution P with random
variable X ∈X, which is addressed in detail in Appendix C.1.
(f) Reward Function: For each agent i, ri : S ×A×X →R defines the reward function, penalizing both
the number of allocated chutes and the number of packages in the recirculation buffer. The recirculation
is a function of the induction distribution, which is defined in Section 2.2.
The model is completed with discount factor γ ∈(0, 1) and initial state distribution ρ0. To address the
scalability of the state-action space and computational feasibility of the expectation in (3), we employ the
Value Decomposition Network (VDN) [6] with budget constraints for computing joint actions. Implementation
details are provided in Section 2.3 and Section 2.4.
The system operates in discrete time steps, where at each step t, individual agents corresponding to
destinations make chute allocation decisions. Each agent i employs a local policy πi : Oi × Ai →[0, 1],
which maps local observations oi to probabilities over possible chute allocation actions. Each agent i learns its
optimal local policy πi,∗by maximizing the expected discounted return E[Ri
t] = E
 P∞
t′=t γt′−tri
t′

, where
ri
t′ denotes the instantaneous reward at time t′. The expectation accounts for both the stochastic nature of the
policy and the environment dynamics. This formulation naturally aligns individual agent objectives with the
global goal of minimizing recirculation while maintaining efficient sortation throughput. The instantaneous
reward function for agent i at time step t is defined as:
ri
t = −recirci
t −2ai
t,
(1)
where recirci
t ≥0 represents the number of packages in recirculation for destination i. Due to the coupled
nature of agent decisions, we utilize the joint action-value function to determine optimal local policies πi,∗:
Qπ(s, a) = E
h N
X
i=1
Ri
t|st = s, at = a
i
,
(2)
which evaluates the expected return when taking joint action a = (a1, . . . , aN) in state s and following joint
policy π thereafter.
To mitigate the exponentially growing policy space, we assume agents execute actions independently
such that π = QN
i=1 πi. The optimal policy π∗is learned using the Deep Q-Network (DQN) [45], where a
neural network Q(s, a; θ) with parameters θ approximates the optimal action-value function Qπ∗(s, a). The
learning process minimizes the loss:
L(θ; X) = Es,a,r,s′
h
(Q(s, a; θ) −y)2i
,
(3)
where y = EX∼P[r(s, a; X)]+γ maxa′ ¯Q(s′, a′; ¯θ) approximates the optimal target values EX∼P[r(s, a; X)]+
γ maxa′ Qπ∗(s′, a′). Here, r(s, a; X) represents the instantaneous reward under the current state-action pair
and induction pattern X.1 Stability of the learning process is enhanced through two mechanisms: a target
network ¯Q with periodic parameter updates using the most recent values of θ, and the use of an experience
replay buffer D storing transition tuples (s, a, r, s′). The resulting optimal policy takes the form:
π∗(s, a) =
(
1
|A(s)|
if a ∈A(s)
0
otherwise
,
(4)
where A(s) = arg maxa Q(s, a; θ∗) and θ∗= arg min L(θ; X).
1See Section 2.2 for detailed definition of induction pattern and induction generating distribution.
5

2.2
Induction Distribution
For a given sortation warehouse with D destinations and T time intervals (e.g., hours or minutes) during one
day, we consider the random variable X = {X1, . . . , XDT } ∈RDT , where Xi ≥0 represents the number of
packages arriving at each destination-time pair (d, t) during the day. We model each day’s induction as a
random variable X, generated by an unknown probability distribution P, which we refer to as the induction
generating distribution. We assume the total daily package induction volume remains constant at V across all
days, as the MARL chute mapping policy is primarily influenced by the distribution pattern rather than total
volume variations.
Definition 2.1. (Induction Generating Distribution) Let us consider a multinomial distribution M(n, p1, ..., pk),
which obtains its support on
(
(z1, ..., zk)

k
X
i=1
zi = V, zi ≥0, ∀i = 1, ..., n
)
,
(5)
and the probability mass function is given by
P(X1 = z1, . . . , Xk = zk) =
n!
z1!z2! . . . zk! pz1
1 pz2
2 . . . pzk
k .
(6)
For a daily induction random variable X and induction patterns from temporally proximate dates (e.g.,
within the same week), we assume they follow the same induction generating distribution M(n, p1, . . . , pDT ).
The empirical induction generating distribution is estimated using Sample Average Approximation (SAA)
[46] from these temporally related dates.
In practice, we utilize induction data collected from Years 1-4, clustering it into 21 groups based on week
numbers. For each group g, we construct an empirical induction generating distribution Pg via SAA, modeled
as a multinomial distribution using all induction data within that group. The group ambiguity set M in (9) is
then formed using the collection of distributions {P1, P2, . . . , P21}.
The probability pj of an incoming package being assigned to the j’th destination-time pair is derived
from the approximated empirical multinomial distribution. The distribution of V packages across destinations
is then determined through sampling V times according to these probabilities.
2.3
Dimension Reduction of the State-Action Space
To manage the dimensionality of the state-action space, we decompose the joint Q-network into a sum of
local Q-networks. Each local network captures the expected return of individual agents’ chute mapping
actions, while the joint network represents the expected return of the complete chute assignment across all
agents. Specifically, we express the joint Q-network as:
Q(s, a, θ) =
XN
i=1 Q′(i, si, ai; θ),
(7)
where the input space scales linearly with the number of agents. While this decomposition is similar to [6],
our approach learns a single shared Q′ network for all agents instead of separate networks for each agent,
resulting in improved computational efficiency.
2.4
Feasibility of Joint Actions
In unconstrained settings, agents would simply select actions that maximize their individual Q-networks,
with the joint action being the collection of these individual choices. However, the chute mapping problem
6

introduces resource constraints, as agents must share a limited number of available chutes. This necessitates
coordination to allocate resources optimally among agents based on their state-action values.
Given a budget constraint M on the joint actions such that PN
i=1 ai ≤M, we formulate the following
integer program to determine the optimal joint action that maximizes the joint Q-network for any state s:
maximize
a1,··· ,aN
XN
i=1 Q′(i, si, ai; θ)
s.t.
XN
i=1 ai ≤M, ai ∈N
(8)
This integer program, which can be efficiently solved using commercial solvers such as Google-OR
Tools [47] or Xpress [48], serves two purposes: it generates feasible data for the replay buffer to compute
the expectation in (3) during training, and it determines the optimal actions once learning has converged.
Notably, this optimization step is separate from the Q-learning process.
While the above MARL-based chute mapping policy demonstrates strong performance under standard
operating conditions, it exhibits significant performance degradation when faced with distribution shifts in
package induction patterns (see Figure 6 in Section 5). This vulnerability to out-of-distribution scenarios
motivates our robust formulation.
In this paper, our objective is to introduce robustness to distribution shifts in the learned chute mapping
policies. We achieve this by incorporating group DRO into the MARL framework, giving rise to the proposed
DRMARL approach. Our porposed framework ensures reliable and robust performance on Amazon robotic
sortation warehouses, even under unforeseen future induction scenarios.
3
Distributionally Robust Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning with Group
DRO
In this section, we enhance the MARL chute mapping framework described in Section 2 by incorporating
group Distributionally Robust Optimization (DRO) to handle uncertainty and variability in package induction
patterns. This approach enables us to develop robust policies that perform well across diverse induction
scenarios, including previously unseen induction patterns.
Compared to traditional stochastic optimization that assumes fixed probability distributions, DRO [49, 50,
51, 52, 53, 54, 55] takes a more general approach that defines an ambiguity set containing multiple plausible
distributions derived from the available data. By optimizing for the worst-case scenario within this set, DRO
learns policies that remain effective even when the testing distribution differs from the training conditions, as
is the case in the chute mapping problem considered here.
3.1
Group DRO
In DRO, the ambiguity set that captures uncertainty in the data-generating distribution can be defined in
various ways. Group DRO [40, 41] offers an efficient way of defining the ambiguity set using a finite
collection of known distributions. For robotic sortation warehouses, these distributions can be derived from
historical induction patterns.
Following [39], we define the unknown distribution ˜P as a combination of m distributions Pg, each
indexed by a group g in the set G = {1, 2, ..., m}. The ambiguity set M is then defined as a convex
combination of these groups:
M :=
n
˜P =
m
X
g=1
qg Pg | q ∈∆m
o
,
(9)
where ∆m denotes the (m −1)-dimensional probability simplex [56] (see Figure 3).
7

Figure 3: Ambiguity set M in regular DRO [51] (left) versus group DRO [39] (right).
In the dynamic chute mapping problem, we assume that past years of operational data from sortation
warehouses provide sufficiently rich historical induction patterns that can be used to obtain representative
distribution groups G. With this assumption, it is reasonable to expect that any future induction pattern ˜P can
be represented as a combination of the basis distributions Pg with g ∈G. As shown in [39], evaluating the
worst-case reward all m groups in G is equivalent to evaluating the reward for the worst-case distribution
within the ambiguity set M defined in (9).
Lemma 3.1. Consider an ambiguity set M formed by Pgs as defined in (9). For any state-action pair
(s, a) ∈S × A, the worst-case expected reward satisfies:
inf
g∈G EX∼Pg

r
 s, a; X

= inf
P∈M EX∼P

r
 s, a; X

,
(10)
where G denotes the set of group indices.
Lemma 3.1 demonstrates a key advantage of group DRO: while general DRO problems are infinite-
dimensional and computationally challenging, group DRO reduces the optimization to a finite-dimensional
problem over m groups. This reduction makes the training of distributionally robust MARL (DRMARL)
computationally tractable.
3.2
DRMARL with Group DRO
In the MARL framework described in Section 2, the policy parameters θ are optimized as follows:
θ∗:= arg min
θ∈Θ
EX∼P [L(θ; X)] ,
(11)
and directly applying group DRO to MARL leads to:
˜θ := arg min
θ∈Θ

max
g∈G EX∼Pg [L(θ; X)]

.
(12)
However, conventional group DRO approaches are not directly applicable to MARL problems, since
minimizing the worst-case Bellman error does not necessarily lead to a policy that is optimal under worst-case
rewards. Instead, our proposed DRMARL seeks a robust policy that selects actions that are optimal with
respect to worst-case reward functions. To achieve this, we introduce the distributionally robust Bellman
operator, defined in the following result.
Lemma 3.2. For an ambiguity set M defined in (9) with group set G, the distributionally robust Bellman
operator is given by:
˜TG( ˜Q)(s, a) = inf
g∈G EX∼Pg[r(s, a; X)] + γ max
a′
˜Q(s′, a′),
8

Algorithm 1 CB-based Worst-Case Reward Predictor
1: Input: Learning rate lCB, initial parameters ψ0, induction distribution groups G, MARL policy with
QMARL, exploration rate εCB
2: Initialize: ψ ←ψ0, replay buffer DCB ←∅
3: for episode = 1, ..., kCB do
4:
Initialize the environment with random group g′ ∈G and observe initial state s0
5:
for time step t = 0, ..., T do
6:
Select action at ←arg maxa∈A QMARL(st, a)
7:
With probability εCB, select g′ ∼Uniform(G); otherwise, g′ ←arg ming∈G QCB(st, at, g; ψ)
8:
Execute action at, observe reward rt and next state st+1 using group g′
9:
Store transition (st, at, g′, rt, st+1) in DCB
10:
Sample mini-batch from DCB and update ψ:
11:
ψ ←ψ −lCB∇ψLCB(ψ)
12:
st ←st+1, reduce εCB
13:
end for
14: end for
15: Output: Optimized CB predictor parameters ψ∗
where ˜Q is the distributionally robust Q-function.
Accordingly, the distributionally robust loss is given by
˜L(θ; X) := Es,a,r,a′  ˜Q(s, a; θ) −inf
g∈G EX∼Pg[r(s, a; X)] −γ max
a′
¯˜Q(s′, a′; ¯θ)
2
,
(13)
and the distributionally robust parameters ˜θG are optimized by solving
˜θG := arg min
θ∈Θ
˜L(θ; X).
(14)
4
Contextual Bandit-based Worst-Case Reward Predictor for DRMARL
Solving the MARL group DRO problem (14) is theoretically feasible since the worst-case reward can be
evaluated for each (s, a) by exhaustively searching among all distribution groups G. However, this approach
is inefficient when the number of groups is large and forward simulation in the environment is expensive.
This is particularly the case in the multi-agent dynamic chute mapping problem, where millions of packages
are sorted across many destinations. Common group DRO techniques, such as soft reweighting [39], may
not perform well in MARL because, unlike regression tasks, the data distribution depends on the agent’s
policy. As the policy evolves, the groups that are underrepresented or perform poorly may also change
dynamically. This dynamic nature of the problem makes it challenging to apply static or even adaptive
reweighting schemes, which assume a relatively stable data distribution.
To enhance the efficiency of the training process, we propose a novel contextual bandit-based worst-case
reward distribution predictor that trains a contextual bandit (CB) [57, 58] model to predict the worst-case
distribution group g ∈G for each state-action pair (s, a).
4.1
CB-based Worst-Case Reward Predictor
The CB treats the current state-action pair (s, a) as contextual information, and its arms are defined over
the groups of distributions in the set G. The CB aims to predict the group g that minimizes the reward
9

Algorithm 2 DRMARL with CB-based Worst-Case Reward Predictor
1: Input: Learning rate lr, initial parameters θ0, induction distribution groups G, pre-trained CB predictor
QCB, exploration rate ε
2: Initialize: θ ←θ0, replay buffer D ←∅
3: for episode = 1, ..., k do
4:
Initialize the environment with random group g′ ∈G and observe initial state s0
5:
for time step t = 0, ..., T do
6:
With probability ε, select at ∼Uniform(A); otherwise, at ←arg maxa∈A ˜Q(st, a; θ)
7:
Predict worst-case distribution group using CB: g′ ←arg ming∈G QCB(st, at, g)
8:
Execute at, observe reward rt and next state st+1 using group g′
9:
Store transition (st, at, g′, rt, st+1) in D
10:
Sample mini-batch from D and update parameters: θ ←θ −lr∇θ ˜L(θ)
11:
st ←st+1, reduce ε
12:
end for
13: end for
14: Output: Optimized DRMARL policy parameters ˜θG
EX∼Pgr(s, a; X), which represents the worst-case reward among all groups. The CB is constructed as
follows:
Context space: S × A, where (s, a) ∈S × A represents the state and the chute mapping actions at each
step.
Action space: G = {1, 2, . . . , m}, where g ∈G denotes a group associated with an induction distribution.
Reward: A reward function r : (S × A) × G →R, where r(s, a; X) represents the observed reward for
choosing distribution Pg at the current state-action pair (s, a).
The CB is represented by a Q-function that approximates the expected reward of choosing distribution
Pg given a context (s, a). For this purpose, we use an independent DQN [45]:
QCB(s, a, g; ψ) = EX∼Pg [r(s, a; X)] ,
(15)
where the reward function r(s, a; X) is observed after running a single-step forward simulation with (s, a)
under the induction-generating distribution Pg. The QCB function is learned by minimizing the following
loss, with the detailed training process shown in Algorithm 1:
LCB(ψ) := Es,a
 QCB
 s, a, g; ψ

−EX∼Pg [r(s, a; X)]
2
.
(16)
In Algorithm 1, the exploration of state-action pairs (s, a) is guided by the existing MARL policy with
QMARL, which ensures sufficient exploration of the context space for the chute-mapping problem. For other
applications, different exploration policies can be employed, such as random action selection, to ensure
adequate coverage of the state-action space.
4.2
DRMARL with CB-based Worst-Case Reward Predictor
Once the QCB function has been trained, we can rewrite the distributionally robust loss (13) as:
˜L(θ; X) = Es,a,r,a′
h  ˜Q(s, a; θ) −EX∼Pg′ [r(s, a; X)] −γ max
a′
¯˜Q(s′, a′; ¯θ)
2i
,
(17)
where g′ = arg ming∈G QCB(s, a, g) is the index of the distribution group with the predicted worst-case
reward.
10

Table 1: Key sortation metrics comparison across policies, averaged over m = 9 groups.
Policy
Recirculation Rate (↓)
Throughput (↑)
Recirculation Amount (↓)
MARL
2.16% ± 2.35%
11740.98
259.02
DRMARL (random)
1.56% ± 1.45%
11812.77
187.23
DRMARL (with QCB)
0.56% ± 0.18%
11932.21
67.79
DRMARL (exhaustive)
0.55% ± 0.13%
11933.68
66.32
MARL (group-specific)
0.53% ± 0.14%
11936.60
63.40
The training procedure of DRMARL is shown in Algorithm 2. The key difference compared to MARL
training is that DRMARL aims to train a DQN that estimates the worst-case return among all groups, while
MARL aims to estimate the observed return only for a specific induction distribution. Moreover, in contrast to
traditional group DRO, the index of the worst-case distribution g′ in DRMARL is not obtained via exhaustive
search; instead, it is predicted by QCB given the state-action pair (s, a). The independent Q-network QCB is
learned beforehand using Algorithm 1 and remains unchanged during DRMARL training. While it may seem
counter-intuitive that QCB predicts the worst-case group after ˜Q selects an action, this design enables QCB to
provide the worst-case expected return for each (s, a) pair, thereby enabling the learning of a robust policy.
5
Simulation
In this section, we demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed DRMARL policy under adversarial induction
changes in both a simplified simulation and a large-scale Amazon robotic sortation warehouse simulation
environment.
5.1
Simplified Robotic Sortation Warehouse Simulation
In the simplified simulation environment, there are 10 eject chutes, one recirculation chute, and 20 total unique
destinations. Packages arrive at the sortation warehouse according to the induction data X generated from
an induction distribution P. When packages exceed the chutes’ capacities, they are sent to the recirculation
chute. One training/testing episode consists of 5 hours, with each time step being 30 minutes, after which the
environment is reset. An eject chute can be reallocated at each time step. The implementation details are
provided in Appendix B.
We train the DRMARL policy over 300 episodes using training data generated from 9 distinct induction
distribution groups. Similarly, the regular MARL policy is trained for 300 episodes on the same groups.
Due to the stochastic nature of the induction-generating distributions, the induction data differs for each
simulation trial.
The comparison of key metrics is shown in Table 1. The DRMARL policy with QCB achieves the best
performance across all metrics. For reference, the last row shows the theoretical optimal performance of
group-specific MARL policies, which are trained and tested on the same group. DRMARL performs only
marginally below this optimal baseline, demonstrating a favorable trade-off between individual performance
and distributional robustness. Comparison with both random group selection and exhaustive worst-case
search demonstrates that QCB efficiently identifies worst-case groups while learning an equally effective
policy, performing significantly better than random selection and matching the robustness of exhaustive
search. Here, random group selection refers to replacing Line 7 of Algorithm 2 with:
g′ ←Uniform(G)
instead of using:
g′ ←arg min
g∈G QCB(st, at, g)
11

0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
Training Time (Seconds)
0
250
500
750
1000
1250
1500
1750
2000
Recirculation
CB-based Predictor
Exhaustive Search
Random Group Switch
MARL on Group #1
Figure 4: Training efficiency comparison in simplified warehouse.
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
Training Episode
0.50
0.75
1.00
1.25
1.50
1.75
2.00
Recirc Pred Loss
Average Prediction Loss
1.2
1.3
1.4
1.5
1.6
1.7
Max Pred Loss
Max Prediction Loss
Figure 5: Training recirculation rate prediction loss (16) for CB in simplified robotic sortation warehouse.
This confirms that QCB effectively enables the DRMARL policy to explore worst-case reward functions
during training. Furthermore, when compared to a DRMARL policy trained using exhaustive search over
worst-case rewards for each state-action pair (s, a), the QCB-based approach achieves equivalent policy
performance and robustness while being computationally more efficient. The last row presents the theoretical
optimal performance of group-specific MARL policies (trained and tested on the same group). DRMARL
performs only marginally below this optimal baseline, demonstrating an effective balance between individual
performance and distributional robustness.
Figure 5 illustrates the training progress of QCB, showing significant reductions in both average and
maximum prediction errors of the recirculation rate throughout the training process. The training efficiency
comparison across different approaches is presented in Figure 4. DRMARL with QCB requires less than
300 seconds to converge, while an exhaustive search for the worst-case group takes at least 2900 seconds
to complete. DRMARL with exhaustive search requires the longest training time due to its comprehensive
exploration across all distribution groups. In contrast, DRMARL with QCB converges significantly faster
while matching the exhaustive search’s recirculation performance in initial stages of the training, validating
QCB’s ability to identify worst-case groups. DRMARL with random group selection shows faster convergence
than the QCB-based approach, but this is because random exploration does not guarantee finding worst-case
reward functions. The group-specific MARL policy exhibits the fastest convergence due to the relative
simplicity of its training task.
12

Figure 6: Relative degradation of MARL policy (trained on Year 4) on OOD (Years 1-3) induction data, compared to
Year 4.
Table 2: Relative improvement (↑) of DRMARL over MARL baseline, averaged across m = 21 groups.
Policy
Recirc Rate Reduction
Throughput Increase
Recirc Amount Reduction
DRMARL
79.97%
5.62%
33.64%
MARL (group-specific)
85.42%
9.80%
40.50%
5.2
Large-Scale Amazon Robotic Sortation Warehouse Simulation
5.2.1
Implementation Details
In the large-scale simulation environment, there are 187 eject chutes, one recirculation chute, and 120 total
unique destinations. Packages arrive at the sortation warehouse according to the corresponding induction data
X generated from the induction distribution P2. When packages exceed chute capacities or miss departure
transportation schedules, they are sent to the recirculation chute and added to the sequence of new packages at
the next time step. One training/testing episode consists of 11 hours, with each time step being five minutes,
after which the environment is reset. Every five minutes, we assign destinations to chutes that become
available for reallocation.
We train the DRMARL policy over 200 episodes using training data generated from 21 distinct induction
distribution groups spanning several years. Similarly, the regular MARL policy is trained for 200 episodes
using induction data from Year 4. For testing, we evaluate both policies on newly generated induction
data from 21 distinct distribution groups, conducting five experiments per generated induction. Due to the
stochastic nature of the induction-generating distributions, the test induction data remains unseen during
training for both policies.
5.2.2
Robustness of the Chute Mapping Policy
To motivate the need for the proposed DRMARL framework, we first study the performance of the regular
MARL policy on out-of-distribution (OOD) induction data (e.g., induction data from Years 1-3), as shown in
Figure 6. The results suggest that the regular MARL policy is not robust against OOD induction data.
Table 2 presents the average relative performance improvement of DRMARL across all 21 distribution
groups, using MARL as the baseline. The proposed DRMARL method demonstrates robust performance on
all induction groups, consistently outperforming the baseline MARL policy. For reference, the bottom row
shows the theoretical optimal performance obtained by training and testing a group-specific MARL on each
individual group. As expected, DRMARL performs marginally below these group-specific MARL policies,
illustrating the trade-off between performance and distributional robustness. Detailed results are provided in
Appendix D.
To evaluate DRMARL’s robustness beyond the ambiguity set M, we tested it on induction distributions
P′ outside the group ambiguity set M (P′ /∈M). As shown in Figure 7, DRMARL maintains consistent
2Due to common industry confidentiality practices, we cannot disclose the specific data source and report only relative performance
improvements. The data represents realistic package flow patterns typical of Amazon robotic sortation facilities.
13

Figure 7: Recirculation rate improvement of DRMARL over two equally-performing MARL policies trained on
distributions inside and outside M.
Figure 8: Training prediction loss (16) of QCB predictor, averaged over 11-hour simulations.
sortation performance and generalizes effectively to distributions even outside the ambiguity set M.
5.2.3
CB-based Worst-Case Reward Predictor
Following Section 4, we train an independent Q-network QCB to predict the worst-case recirculation (reward)
for each state-action pair (s, a) across groups G. The training of QCB uses the existing MARL policy, with
the progress shown in Figure 8. The learned QCB achieves high accuracy, with prediction errors below 1% of
the recirculation rate, enabling reliable identification of worst-case scenarios among groups g ∈G.
During each day’s 11-hour simulation, as illustrated in Figure 9, QCB’s prediction accuracy improves
substantially after the first hour. While initially suboptimal, QCB’s performance remains sufficient for
DRMARL training, as the impact of worst-case distributions on recirculation becomes more pronounced in
later stages when fewer chutes are available.
5.2.4
Efficient Training with CB-based Worst-Case Reward Predictor
The CB-based worst-case reward predictor QCB substantially improves training efficiency by eliminating the
need for exhaustive group evaluation at each time step, reducing the computational complexity of the worst-
case group identification from O(m) to O(1). As demonstrated in Figure 10, training with QCB achieves
significantly faster convergence compared to exhaustive evaluation over G, which requires approximately
924 hours on a cloud instance with 64 vCPUs (Intel Xeon Scalable 4th generation) and 128 GB RAM.
The lightweight Q-network updates enabled CPU-only training, with most computation time spent on
environment simulation. This efficiency advantage becomes even more pronounced when dealing with
complex environments or larger group sets.
Figure 10 also compares the training efficiency of different approaches. The group-specific MARL,
which trains on group #20, shows the fastest convergence due to its simplified learning objective. Among
distributionally robust approaches, DRMARL with random group selection (g′ ←random(G)) converges
initially faster than other variants but achieves suboptimal robustness since it may miss critical worst-case
scenarios. DRMARL with QCB strikes a balance between training speed and performance, converging
14

Figure 9: QCB prediction loss for recirculation percentage, averaged over 25 test simulations.
Figure 10: Training computational efficiency comparison in large-scale Amazon robotic sortation warehouse simulation
environments.
significantly faster than exhaustive search while maintaining near-optimal worst-case performance guarantees.
As expected, DRMARL with exhaustive search over all distribution groups requires the longest training time,
though it serves as a valuable baseline for validating the efficiency of our QCB-based approach.
6
Conclusion
In this paper, we introduced DRMARL, a framework that integrates group-DRO into MARL to enhance
policy robustness against adversarial distribution shifts in warehouse sortation systems. To address the
computational cost of identifying the worst-case group, we developed a CB-based predictor that significantly
reduces worst-case identification complexity from O(m) to O(1). Experimental results from both simplified
and large-scale warehouse environments demonstrate that DRMARL achieves near-optimal performance
across all distribution groups while maintaining computational efficiency. The framework shows strong
generalization even to distributions outside the training set, and its design principles can be extended to other
MARL applications where distributional robustness is crucial.
15

Acknowledgments
We would like to express our sincere gratitude to our colleagues at Amazon for their support and valuable
contributions throughout this research. In particular, we extend special thanks to Rahul Chandan and
Mouhacine Benosman for their insightful feedback and constructive discussions to this work.
References
[1]
Peter R Wurman, Raffaello D’Andrea, and Mick Mountz. “Coordinating hundreds of cooperative,
autonomous vehicles in warehouses”. In: AI magazine 29.1 (2008), pp. 9–9.
[2]
Kaveh Azadeh, Ren´e De Koster, and Debjit Roy. “Robotized and automated warehouse systems:
Review and recent developments”. In: Transportation Science 53.4 (2019), pp. 917–945.
[3]
Amazon. How Amazon robots navigate congestion. https://www.amazon.science/latest-news/how-
amazon-robots-navigate-congestion. 2022.
[4]
Amazon. 10 years of Amazon robotics: how robots help sort packages, move product, and improve
safety. https://www.aboutamazon.com/news/operations/10-years-of-amazon-robotics-how-robots-help-
sort-packages-move-product-and-improve-safety. Accessed: 2023-01-23. 2022.
[5]
Amazon. Tour an Amazon fulfillment center. https://www.aboutamazon.com/workplace/tours. Ac-
cessed: 2023-01-23. 2023.
[6]
Yi Shen, Benjamin McClosky, Joseph W Durham, and Michael M Zavlanos. “Multi-Agent Reinforce-
ment Learning for Resource Allocation in Large-Scale Robotic Warehouse Sortation Centers”. In:
2023 62nd IEEE Conference on Decision and Control (CDC). IEEE. 2023, pp. 7137–7143.
[7]
Nils Boysen and Malte Fliedner. “Cross dock scheduling: Classification, literature review and research
agenda”. In: Omega 38.6 (2010), pp. 413–422.
[8]
Ryan Lowe, Yi I Wu, Aviv Tamar, Jean Harb, OpenAI Pieter Abbeel, and Igor Mordatch. “Multi-agent
actor-critic for mixed cooperative-competitive environments”. In: Advances in neural information
processing systems 30 (2017).
[9]
Peter Sunehag, Guy Lever, Audrunas Gruslys, Wojciech Marian Czarnecki, Vinicius Zambaldi, Max
Jaderberg, Marc Lanctot, Nicolas Sonnerat, Joel Z Leibo, Karl Tuyls, et al. “Value-decomposition
networks for cooperative multi-agent learning”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1706.05296 (2017).
[10]
Mikayel Samvelyan, Tabish Rashid, Christian Schroeder De Witt, Gregory Farquhar, Nantas Nardelli,
Tim GJ Rudner, Chia-Man Hung, Philip HS Torr, Jakob Foerster, and Shimon Whiteson. “The starcraft
multi-agent challenge”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1902.04043 (2019).
[11]
Tabish Rashid, Mikayel Samvelyan, Christian Schroeder De Witt, Gregory Farquhar, Jakob Foerster,
and Shimon Whiteson. “Monotonic value function factorisation for deep multi-agent reinforcement
learning”. In: Journal of Machine Learning Research 21.178 (2020), pp. 1–51.
[12]
Stefan Fedtke and Nils Boysen. “Layout planning of sortation conveyors in parcel distribution centers”.
In: Transportation Science 51.1 (2017), pp. 3–18.
[13]
Luis J Novoa, Ahmad I Jarrah, and David P Morton. “Flow balancing with uncertain demand for
automated package sorting centers”. In: Transportation Science 52.1 (2018), pp. 210–227.
[14]
Reem Khir, Alan Erera, and Alejandro Toriello. “Two-stage sort planning for express parcel delivery”.
In: IISE Transactions 53.12 (2021), pp. 1353–1368.
16

[15]
Reem Khir, Alan Erera, and Alejandro Toriello. “Robust planning of sorting operations in express
delivery systems”. In: European Journal of Operational Research (2022).
[16]
Hongrui Nie, Shaosheng Li, and Yong Liu. “Multi-agent deep reinforcement learning for resource
allocation in the multi-objective HetNet”. In: 2021 International Wireless Communications and Mobile
Computing (IWCMC). IEEE. 2021, pp. 116–121.
[17]
Ruru Mei and Zhugang Wang. “Multi-Agent Deep Reinforcement Learning-Based Resource Allocation
for Cognitive Radio Networks”. In: IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology (2024).
[18]
Wang Jun-Han, He He, Jaesang Cha, Incheol Jeong, and Ahn Chang-Jun. “Multi-Agent Reinforcement
Learning for Efficient Resource Allocation in Internet of Vehicles”. In: Electronics 14.1 (2025), p. 192.
[19]
Xihan Li, Jia Zhang, Jiang Bian, Yunhai Tong, and Tie-Yan Liu. “A cooperative multi-agent reinforce-
ment learning framework for resource balancing in complex logistics network”. In: arXiv preprint
arXiv:1903.00714 (2019).
[20]
Jun Morimoto and Kenji Doya. “Robust reinforcement learning”. In: Neural computation 17.2 (2005),
pp. 335–359.
[21]
Wolfram Wiesemann, Daniel Kuhn, and Berc¸ Rustem. “Robust Markov decision processes”. In:
Mathematics of Operations Research 38.1 (2013), pp. 153–183.
[22]
Lerrel Pinto, James Davidson, Rahul Sukthankar, and Abhinav Gupta. “Robust adversarial reinforce-
ment learning”. In: International conference on machine learning. PMLR. 2017, pp. 2817–2826.
[23]
Janosch Moos, Kay Hansel, Hany Abdulsamad, Svenja Stark, Debora Clever, and Jan Peters. “Robust
reinforcement learning: A review of foundations and recent advances”. In: Machine Learning and
Knowledge Extraction 4.1 (2022), pp. 276–315.
[24]
Vineet Goyal and Julien Grand-Clement. “Robust markov decision processes: Beyond rectangularity”.
In: Mathematics of Operations Research 48.1 (2023), pp. 203–226.
[25]
Taku Yamagata and Raul Santos-Rodriguez. “Safe and Robust Reinforcement-Learning: Principles
and Practice”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.18539 (2024).
[26]
Huan Xu and Shie Mannor. “Distributionally robust Markov decision processes”. In: Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems 23 (2010).
[27]
Elena Smirnova, Elvis Dohmatob, and J´er´emie Mary. “Distributionally robust reinforcement learning”.
In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1902.08708 (2019).
[28]
Linfang Hou, Liang Pang, Xin Hong, Yanyan Lan, Zhiming Ma, and Dawei Yin. “Robust reinforcement
learning with Wasserstein constraint”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.00945 (2020).
[29]
Shengbo Wang, Nian Si, Jose Blanchet, and Zhengyuan Zhou. “On the foundation of distributionally
robust reinforcement learning”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.09018 (2023).
[30]
Shyam Sundhar Ramesh, Pier Giuseppe Sessa, Yifan Hu, Andreas Krause, and Ilija Bogunovic.
“Distributionally robust model-based reinforcement learning with large state spaces”. In: International
Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics. PMLR. 2024, pp. 100–108.
[31]
Zhengfei Zhang, Kishan Panaganti, Laixi Shi, Yanan Sui, Adam Wierman, and Yisong Yue. “Dis-
tributionally Robust Constrained Reinforcement Learning under Strong Duality”. In: arXiv preprint
arXiv:2406.15788 (2024).
[32]
Miao Lu, Han Zhong, Tong Zhang, and Jose Blanchet. “Distributionally Robust Reinforcement
Learning with Interactive Data Collection: Fundamental Hardness and Near-Optimal Algorithm”. In:
arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.03578 (2024).
17

[33]
Allen Z Ren and Anirudha Majumdar. “Distributionally robust policy learning via adversarial environ-
ment generation”. In: IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters 7.2 (2022), pp. 1379–1386.
[34]
Zijian Liu, Qinxun Bai, Jose Blanchet, Perry Dong, Wei Xu, Zhengqing Zhou, and Zhengyuan Zhou.
“Distributionally Robust Q-Learning”. In: International Conference on Machine Learning. PMLR.
2022, pp. 13623–13643.
[35]
Kaiqing Zhang, Tao Sun, Yunzhe Tao, Sahika Genc, Sunil Mallya, and Tamer Basar. “Robust multi-
agent reinforcement learning with model uncertainty”. In: Advances in neural information processing
systems 33 (2020), pp. 10571–10583.
[36]
Alexander Bukharin, Yan Li, Yue Yu, Qingru Zhang, Zhehui Chen, Simiao Zuo, Chao Zhang, Songan
Zhang, and Tuo Zhao. “Robust multi-agent reinforcement learning via adversarial regularization:
Theoretical foundation and stable algorithms”. In: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems
36 (2024).
[37]
Laixi Shi, Eric Mazumdar, Yuejie Chi, and Adam Wierman. “Sample-Efficient Robust Multi-Agent Re-
inforcement Learning in the Face of Environmental Uncertainty”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.18909
(2024).
[38]
Laixi Shi, Jingchu Gai, Eric Mazumdar, Yuejie Chi, and Adam Wierman. “Breaking the Curse of
Multiagency in Robust Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.20067
(2024).
[39]
Shiori Sagawa, Pang Wei Koh, Tatsunori B Hashimoto, and Percy Liang. “Distributionally robust
neural networks for group shifts: On the importance of regularization for worst-case generalization”.
In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1911.08731 (2019).
[40]
Weihua Hu, Gang Niu, Issei Sato, and Masashi Sugiyama. “Does distributionally robust supervised
learning give robust classifiers?” In: International Conference on Machine Learning. PMLR. 2018,
pp. 2029–2037.
[41]
Yonatan Oren, Shiori Sagawa, Tatsunori B Hashimoto, and Percy Liang. “Distributionally robust
language modeling”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1909.02060 (2019).
[42]
Tasuku Soma, Khashayar Gatmiry, and Stefanie Jegelka. “Optimal algorithms for group distributionally
robust optimization and beyond”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.13669 (2022).
[43]
Xunhao Wu and Jun Fu. “Distributed robust optimization for multi-agent systems with guaranteed
finite-time convergence”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.01201 (2023).
[44]
Mengdi Xu, Peide Huang, Yaru Niu, Visak Kumar, Jielin Qiu, Chao Fang, Kuan-Hui Lee, Xuewei Qi,
Henry Lam, Bo Li, et al. “Group distributionally robust reinforcement learning with hierarchical
latent variables”. In: International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics. PMLR. 2023,
pp. 2677–2703.
[45]
Volodymyr Mnih, Koray Kavukcuoglu, David Silver, Andrei A Rusu, Joel Veness, Marc G Bellemare,
Alex Graves, Martin Riedmiller, Andreas K Fidjeland, Georg Ostrovski, et al. “Human-level control
through deep reinforcement learning”. In: nature 518.7540 (2015), pp. 529–533.
[46]
Sujin Kim, Raghu Pasupathy, and Shane G Henderson. “A guide to sample average approximation”.
In: Handbook of simulation optimization (2015), pp. 207–243.
[47]
Laurent Perron and Vincent Furnon. “OR-Tools”. Version v9.9. In: Google (2024). URL: https:
//developers.google.com/optimization/.
[48]
FICO. Xpress Optimizer. https://www.fico.com/en/products/fico-xpress-optimization. Accessed: 2023-
01-23. 2023.
18

[49]
Erick Delage and Yinyu Ye. “Distributionally robust optimization under moment uncertainty with
application to data-driven problems”. In: Operations research 58.3 (2010), pp. 595–612.
[50]
Alexander Shapiro. “Distributionally robust stochastic programming”. In: SIAM Journal on Optimiza-
tion 27.4 (2017), pp. 2258–2275.
[51]
Hamed Rahimian and Sanjay Mehrotra. “Distributionally robust optimization: A review”. In: arXiv
preprint arXiv:1908.05659 (2019).
[52]
Jianzhe Zhen, Daniel Kuhn, and Wolfram Wiesemann. “A unified theory of robust and distributionally
robust optimization via the primal-worst-equals-dual-best principle”. In: Operations Research (2023).
[53]
Guangyi Liu, Arash Amini, Vivek Pandey, and Nader Motee. “Data-Driven Distributionally Robust
Mitigation of Risk of Cascading Failures”. In: 2024 American Control Conference (ACC). IEEE. 2024,
pp. 3264–3269.
[54]
Daniel Kuhn, Soroosh Shafiee, and Wolfram Wiesemann. Distributionally Robust Optimization. 2024.
arXiv: 2411.02549 [math.OC]. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2411.02549.
[55]
Xenia Konti, Hans Riess, Manos Giannopoulos, Yi Shen, Michael J Pencina, Nicoleta J Economou-
Zavlanos, and Michael M Zavlanos. “Distributionally Robust Clustered Federated Learning: A Case
Study in Healthcare”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.07039 (2024).
[56]
Branko Gr¨unbaum, Victor Klee, Micha A Perles, and Geoffrey Colin Shephard. Convex polytopes.
Vol. 16. Springer, 1967.
[57]
Lihong Li, Wei Chu, John Langford, and Robert E Schapire. “A contextual-bandit approach to
personalized news article recommendation”. In: Proceedings of the 19th international conference on
World wide web. 2010, pp. 661–670.
[58]
Daniel J Russo, Benjamin Van Roy, Abbas Kazerouni, Ian Osband, Zheng Wen, et al. “A tutorial on
thompson sampling”. In: Foundations and Trends® in Machine Learning 11.1 (2018), pp. 1–96.
19

Appendix
A
Proofs of Theoretical Results
A.1
Proof of Lemma 3.1
Recall the definition of M in (9) and for any probability distribution P ∈M, we have
EX∼P

r
 s, a; X

=
Z
r
 s, a; X

P(X) dX
=
Z
r
 s, a; X



m
X
g=1
qg Pi(X)

dX
=
m
X
g=1
qg
Z
r
 s, a; X

Pi(X) dX =
m
X
g=1
qg EX∼Pg

r
 s, a; X

.
(18)
Then, taking the infimum on both sides yields:
inf
P∈M EX∼P

r
 s, a; X

= inf
q∈∆m
m
X
g=1
qgEX∼Pg

r
 s, a; X

= inf
g∈G EX∼Pg

r
 s, a; X

,
(19)
since optimum of a linear program over simplex ∆m is obtained at vertices.
■
A.2
Proof of Lemma 3.2
In order to find the group distributionally robust action-value function ˜Q, we consider the worst-case
immediate reward at each state-action pair (s, a) as:
˜r(s, a) = min
g∈G EX∼Pg [r(s, a; X)] ≤EX∼P [r(s, a; X)] ,
(20)
for all unknown distribution P ∈M. Then, the worst-case return is given by:
˜Rt =
∞
X
k=0
γk ˜r(s, a) ≤
∞
X
k=0
γk EX∼Pk[rt+k+1(s, a; X)],
(21)
where γ ∈[0, 1] is the discount factor and the inequality holds for all possible sequences {Pk}∞
k=0 with
Pk ∈M. Then, the worst-case action-value function under policy π can be expressed as:
˜Qπ(s, a) = Eπ
h
˜r(s, a) + γ ˜Qπ(st+1, at+1)
 st = s, at = a
i
= Es′∼P(·|s,a)
h
˜r(s, a) + γEa′∼π(·|s′) ˜Qπ(s′, a′)
i
,
(22)
and the optimal worst-case action-value function satisfies the Bellman optimality equation:
˜Q∗(s, a) = ˜r(s, a) + γ Es′∼P(·|s,a)

max
a′
˜Q∗(s′, a′)

.
(23)
20

Following the result from [34], the distributionally robust Bellman Operator with ambiguity sets P and
R is given by
˜TP,R( ˜Q)(s, a) =
inf
ps,a∈P
rs,a∈R

Ers,a[r(s, a)] + γ Eps,a

max
a′
˜Q(s′, a′)

,
(24)
where ps,a and rs,a denote the distributions of state transitions probabilities and reward functions respectively,
with their corresponding ambiguity sets P and R. Since the distribution shift in the random variable X only
affects the reward, i.e., the distribution of the reward function rs,a, we have:
˜TR( ˜Q)(s, a) =
inf
rs,a∈R

Ers,a[r(s, a)] + γ

max
a′
˜Q(s′, a′)

= ˜r(s, a) + γ max
a′
˜Q(s′, a′)
= inf
g∈G

EX∼Pg[r(s, a; X)]
	
+ γ max
a′
˜Q(s′, a′) = ˜TG( ˜Q)(s, a).
(25)
We further show the distributionally robust Bellman operator is a contraction map under the ℓ∞norm.
Consider two arbitrary robust action-value functions ˜Q1 and ˜Q2 such that
˜TG( ˜Q1)(s, a) = ˜r(s, a) + γ max
a′
˜Q1(s′, a′)
˜TG( ˜Q2)(s, a) = ˜r(s, a) + γ max
a′
˜Q2(s′, a′).
(26)
Finding the difference yields
| ˜TG( ˜Q1)(s, a) −˜TG( ˜Q2)(s, a)| ≤γ max
s′,a′ | ˜Q1(s′, a′) −˜Q2(s′, a′)|,
(27)
and taking the maximum over all feasible state-action pair (s, a) implies
∥˜TG( ˜Q1) −˜TG( ˜Q2)∥ℓ∞≤γ∥˜Q1 −˜
Q2∥ℓ∞.
(28)
Since γ ∈[0, 1], the robust Bellman operator is contraction map and the Q-learning algorithm will converge
to ˜Q∗.
■
B
Implementation Details for Simplified Robotic Sortation Warehouse
We define a Markov game for N agents (representing unique destinations) by the tuple
 N, S, {Oi}N
i=1, {Ai}N
i=1, P, {ri}N
i=1, γ, ρ0

, where:
(a) Agents: The set of N agents, each corresponding to a unique destination.
(b) State Space: S denotes the joint state space.
(c) Observation Space: For each agent i, Oi ⊂S represents its local observation at each time step,
consisting of:
– The total number of assignable chutes (uniform across all agents)
– The number of chutes currently assigned to agent i
(d) Action Space: For each agent i, Ai ⊂[0, 1] represents its action space, where each action determines
if a new chute will be allocated. An action value of 1 indicates the assignment of a new chute to
destination i. The joint action space is defined as A = QN
i=1 Ai.
21

(e) Transition Probability: P : S × A × S →[0, 1] specifies the probability of transitioning between
states, representing the likelihood of packages being either successfully sorted or diverted to the
recirculation buffer.
(f) Reward Function: For each agent i, ri : S ×A×X →R defines the reward function, which penalizes
the number of packages in the recirculation buffer resulting from the current chute allocation.
The model is completed with discount factor γ ∈(0, 1) and initial state distribution ρ0. In Section 5.1,
we employ the Value Decomposition Network (VDN) [6] combined with budget constraints in computing
joint actions. This approach addresses both the scalability challenges of the state-action space and the
computational feasibility of the expectation in (3). Detailed implementations are provided in Section 2.3 and
Section 2.4.
In the simplified robotic sortation environment, we fix the total induction volume at each time step to
1200 packages. The number of incoming packages for each destination i = 1, . . . , N follows an unknown
normal distribution N(µ, σ). For each destination i, the probability that an incoming package is assigned to
destination i is given by:
P
n
incoming package belongs to i
o
= Φ( i−µ
σ ) −Φ( i−1−µ
σ
)
Φ( N−µ
σ ) −Φ( −µ
σ )
,
(29)
where Φ(z) =
1
√
2π
R z
−∞e−t2
2 dt is the cumulative distribution function of the standard normal distribution.
This formulation ensures PN
i=1 P{incoming package belongs to i} = 1. The distribution of packages across
destinations is then determined by sampling 1200 packages according to the probabilities defined in (29) at
each time step.
In Section 5.1, we assume the destination transportation vehicle has infinite capacity, meaning packages
enter the recirculation buffer only when incoming packages are destined for a location without an assigned
eject chute. In this example, we construct the ambiguity set as:
M :=
n
˜P =
m
X
g=1
qg Pg | q ∈∆m
o
,
(30)
where each Pg represents a normal distribution N(µg, σ). For our simulation, we construct the ambiguity
set using m = 9 groups with means µg ∈{−4, −3, . . . , 0, . . . , 4}, standard deviation σ = 2, and index set
G = {1, 2, . . . , 9}.
C
Implementation Details for Large-Scale Amazon Robotic Sortation Ware-
house
C.1
Distributionally Robust Bellman Operator in Large-Scale Robotic Sortation Warehouses
In large-scale robotic sortation warehouses, we observe that the transition probability is dependent on the
induction random variable X, which violates the assumption in Lemma 3.2. Consequently, we must compute:
inf
P∈M γ Eps,a(X),X∼Pg

max
a′
˜Q(s′, a′)

for the distributionally robust Bellman operator. This leads to:
˜TR( ˜Q)(s, a) = inf
g∈G

EX∼Pg[r(s, a; X)]
	
+ inf
P∈M

γ Eps,a(X),X∼Pg

max
a′
˜Q(s′, a′)

(31)
22

Figure 11: Comparison of worst-case returns: predictions using QCB for both immediate rewards and transition
probabilities versus observed values from extensive state-action space exploration. The close alignment validates our
approach of using QCB to approximate both components of the worst-case scenario (32).
where the computation becomes infinite-dimensional and practically intractable. To address this, during
training, we approximate the distributionally robust Bellman operator with:
˜UR( ˜Q)(s, a) = inf
g∈G

EX∼Pg[r(s, a; X)] + γ Eps,a(X),X∼Pg

max
a′
˜Q(s′, a′)

,
(32)
which provides an upper bound for the distributionally robust Bellman operator, as shown by:
˜UR( ˜Q)(s, a) ≥inf
g∈G

EX∼Pg[r(s, a; X)]
	
+ inf
g∈G

γ Eps,a(X),X∼Pg

max
a′
˜Q(s′, a′)

≥inf
g∈G

EX∼Pg[r(s, a; X)]
	
+ inf
P∈M

γ Eps,a(X),X∼Pg

max
a′
˜Q(s′, a′)

= ˜TR( ˜Q)(s, a).
(33)
During training, we use (32) to construct the loss function (17) for DRMARL, where the optimization
problem within (32) is solved using the solution from the CB-based worst-case reward predictor QCB.
In practice, this approximation (32) proves highly effective for the worst-case return, with the relative
approximation error of ˜UR( ˜Q)(s, a) to ˜TR( ˜Q)(s, a) being less than 0.57% (see Figure 11). This small error
margin indicates that ˜UR( ˜Q)(s, a) does not impede DRMARL’s ability to observe the worst-case return.
D
Additional Simulation Result for Large-Scale Amazon Robotic Sortation
Environments
Table 3 presents detailed validation results comparing MARL and DRMARL chute mapping policies across all
induction distribution groups from Year 1-4. The DRMARL policy demonstrates superior performance across
most groups, achieving both higher package sortation and lower recirculation rates. The only exceptions
are two groups in Year 4, where the MARL policy shows marginally better throughput but at the cost
of higher recirculation rates. This is expected behavior since the MARL policy is specifically trained on
Year 4 induction data, while DRMARL optimizes for robustness rather than throughput maximization.
Overall, DRMARL achieves significant improvements, reducing recirculation by 80% on average while
simultaneously increasing throughput by 5.62% on average.
23

Table 3: Key metrics improvements over MARL baseline trained on Year 4 data in large-scale Amazon robotic sortation
warehouses.
GROUP
NUMBER
YEAR
RECIRCULATION RATE
REDUCTION (%)
PACKAGE THROUGHPUT
INCREASE (%)
PACKAGE RECIRCULATION
AMOUNT REDUCTION (%)
1
1
94.75
31.66
94.21
2
1
93.19
23.47
92.55
3
1
94.62
35.69
94.26
4
1
93.85
25.94
93.85
5
1
95.90
19.50
95.67
6
2
90.47
5.79
90.44
7
2
91.27
5.24
91.11
8
2
77.22
4.13
77.22
9
2
83.34
2.49
83.34
10
2
85.12
5.07
85.12
11
2
92.85
6.97
92.82
12
3
84.22
4.54
84.59
13
3
83.14
15.89
81.57
14
3
85.53
4.17
86.04
15
3
83.63
5.51
83.58
16
3
84.24
5.52
84.19
17
4
34.18
-0.99
36.71
18
4
57.04
-5.85
62.34
19
4
75.78
4.47
75.73
20
4
66.59
9.85
64.18
21
4
75.07
5.64
75.83
24
