DeepCQ+: Robust and Scalable Routing with
Multi-Agent Deep Reinforcement Learning for
Highly Dynamic Networks
Saeed Kaviani∗, Bo Ryu∗, Ejaz Ahmed∗, Kevin Larson†, Anh Le∗, Alex Yahja∗, and Jae H. Kim†
∗EpiSys Science, Inc. : {saeed, bo.ryu, ejaz, anhle, alex}@episci.com
†Boeing Research and Technology : {kevin.a.larson, jae.h.kim}@boeing.com
Abstract—Highly dynamic mobile ad-hoc networks (MANETs)
remain as one of the most challenging environments to develop
and deploy robust, efﬁcient, and scalable routing protocols. In this
paper, we present DeepCQ+ routing protocol which, in a novel
manner, integrates emerging multi-agent deep reinforcement
learning (MADRL) techniques into existing Q-learning-based
routing protocols and their variants, and achieves persistently
higher performance across a wide range of topology and mobility
conﬁgurations. While keeping the overall protocol structure of the
Q-learning-based routing protocols, DeepCQ+ replaces statically
conﬁgured parameterized thresholds and hand-written rules with
carefully designed MADRL agents such that no conﬁguration
of such parameters is required a priori. Extensive simulation
shows that DeepCQ+ yields signiﬁcantly increased end-to-end
throughput with lower overhead and no apparent degradation
of end-to-end delays (hop counts) compared to its Q-learning-
based counterparts. Qualitatively, and perhaps more signiﬁcantly,
DeepCQ+ maintains remarkably similar performance gains un-
der many scenarios that it was not trained for in terms of
network sizes, mobility conditions, and trafﬁc dynamics. To the
best of our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst successful application of
the MADRL framework for the MANET routing problem that
demonstrates a high degree of scalability and robustness even
under the environments that are outside the trained range of
scenarios. This implies that our MARL-based DeepCQ+ design
solution signiﬁcantly improves the performance of Q-learning-
based CQ+ baseline approach for comparison and increases its
practicality and explainability because the real-world MANET
environment will likely vary outside the trained range of MANET
scenarios. Additional techniques to further increase the gains in
performance and scalability are discussed.
I. INTRODUCTION
Design of a robust and efﬁcient routing algorithm has
been one of the most challenging problems in communication
and computer networks. This challenge is compounded in
tactical MANETs where the network is highly dynamic and
unpredictable with respect to mobility and topology, interfer-
ence, and possible jamming [1]. These factors signiﬁcantly
reduce the reliability, and therefore, many traditional MANET
routing protocols require frequent re-computations of end-to-
end routes upon detecting network topology changes, resulting
in a periodic loss in throughput due to trafﬁc not being sent
during the re-computations. This is exacerbated as the rate
of topology change increases. To improve packet delivery
performance via rapid and efﬁcient exploration in these highly
dynamic networks, broadcasting (i.e. transmission of a packet
to all neighbors, also known as ﬂooding) has become a popular
technique [2]–[4]. Traditional MANET routing protocols (e.g.
OSPF and OLSR [3], [4]) perform reliably when the network
is in a stable state but less effectively in highly dynamic
networks. Other traditional adaptive strategies also are not
responsive fast enough for dynamic networks [2].
In this paper, we consider a class of distributed routing
algorithms that only share limited information (i.e. two sin-
gle ﬂoating value) through per-hop acknowledgment (ACK)
packets. This method of cooperation is efﬁcient as ACKs
are inherently present in the networking protocols (such as
MAC-layer acknowledgement) and do not require any extra
implementation in the system. The seminal work [5] proposed
Q-routing, which used a reinforcement learning (RL) module
(i.e. Q-Learning [6]) to route packets and minimize delivery
time. Each node uses Q-values representing quality of paths
which are acquired locally to determine the next hop and
shared via ACK messages. Kumar et al. [7] improved Q-
routing for dynamic networks with the addition of conﬁdence
values (i.e. C-values) in their CQ routing protocol. To improve
reliability and exploration speed of the CQ-routing, smart
robust routing (SRR) algorithm [8] was proposed to add
selective broadcasting actions. SRR utilizes heuristic rules on
when to broadcast in order to improve robustness but keep
the overall overhead under control. We refer to this technique
as CQ+ routing (also known as Robust Routing for Dynamic
Networks, or R2DN) as it is an extension of CQ routing for
balancing between reliability and overhead. Although CQ+
routing uses a simple but efﬁcient switching policy to choose
between unicast and broadcast, its decisions depend on a single
network parameter: best-path conﬁdence level. Consequently,
it has a limited perspective of the entire network that often
leads to a locally optimal solution, since it does not fully
account for the high rate changes in topology and degree
of congestion in likely forwarding paths. Nevertheless, its
performance has been consistent across many scenarios used
in our study, and as a result, it serves as a baseline design for
our MADRL framework.
Routing decisions such as next-hop selection are oppor-
tune targets for employing RL-based techniques, originally
introduced and initiated by Boyan’s Q-routing protocol [5].
Following the Q-routing approach, a ﬂurry of new techniques
and algorithms from the RL community have been developed
and applied to packet routing and scheduling [9]–[13]. These
1
MILCOM 2021 Track 2 - Networking Protocols and Performance
978-1-6654-3956-5/21/$31.00 ©2021 IEEE
31
MILCOM 2021 - 2021 IEEE Military Communications Conference (MILCOM) | 978-1-6654-3956-5/21/$31.00 ©2021 IEEE | DOI: 10.1109/MILCOM52596.2021.9652948
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Texas at Arlington. Downloaded on June 27,2026 at 06:14:28 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

techniques are often scale poorly when network sizes increase
and system parameters change. To address these shortcomings,
new MADRL-based approaches such as [13] and [9] have
been proposed, but they suffer from limited scalability due
to node-speciﬁc policy generated from the training, requiring
a re-training every time a new node needs to be introduced to
the network.
To the best of our knowledge, no study has been reported on
successfully achieving both scalability and robust performance
simultaneously using MADRL in dynamic networks such as
MANET. Our DeepCQ+ is both scalable and robust by allow-
ing MADRL to control the next-hop adaptive ﬂooding deci-
sions while maintaining the CQ+ routing protocol ”structure”.
In this paper, we describe how the MADRL-based agents are
trained to produce a robust and scalable routing policy that can
be applied to any network size, trafﬁc, and dynamic inside
the CQ+ routing protocol structure. More signiﬁcantly, our
DeepCQ+ design and learning methodology enables network
designers to train on a limited range of environment parameters
(e.g. smaller network sizes, single data ﬂow, small variations in
dynamic level, average node velocities, and network coverage
area size), and still to be effective when deployed on a much
wider range of scenarios outside the trained range. This is an
extremely important and unique beneﬁt of DeepCQ+ since
it does not suffer from the curse of dimensionality due to
potentially large network sizes, and catastrophic forgetting
even when trained with wide range of scenarios.
II. ROBUST ROUTING FRAMEWORK
A. SRR (CQ+ routing) Protocol
The SRR algorithm [8] uses the network parameters C and
H1 for the routing decisions primarily introduced in seminal
CQ-routing [7]. Each node i has a H-factor, h(i, j, d) (i.e.
i ⇝j ⇝d), which represents an estimate of the least number
of hops between node i and destination d which passes through
potential next-hop j. To monitor the dynamics of the network,
each node i also have a conﬁdence level or C-value, c(i, j, d),
that represents the conﬁdence in likelihood the packet will
reach its destination h(i, j, d). This C-value is increased with
each packet transmission success (receiving the ACK). Every
packet transmission, the C-value is degraded by a decay factor.
C- and H-factors are updated through the cack and hack which
are propagated by the ACK packets from the receiving node
(e.g. next-hop) to the transmitting node. These ACK values
are computed at the next-hop node j as
hack = 1 + h(j, ˆk, d)
(1)
cack = c(j, ˆk, d)
(2)
where ˆk is the best next-hop estimate of node j to destination
d and it is found by ˆk = arg min
k
h(j, d, k) (1 −c(j, k, d)) In
other words, C- and H-values are exponential moving average
1We have renamed the original Q-factor in CQ-routing to H-factor to
prevent confusion with the Q in the Q-networks and/or Q-learning in the
RL context.
of the cack and hack, respectively. If a transmission fails or there
is no ACK to update C- and H-levels, then H-level cannot
be updated. However, we degrade the C-level as in cack = 0
to reﬂect the path failure. The updates of the C- and H-levels
given by
ht+1(i, j, d) = (1 −α)ht(i, j, d) + αhack,
(3)
ct+1(i, j, d) =
(
(1 −λ)ct(i, j, d)
failure
(1 −λ)ct(i, j, d) + λcack
otherwise
(4)
where 0 ≤α ≤1 is a discount factor for the new observation
with an adaptable value of α = max (cack, 1 −ct(i, j, d)). λ
is the decay factor for the new observation of cack (or 1 −
λ is the decay factor for the old observation). If packet is
received at the destination d, then cack, and hack are set to
1, indicating that we have full conﬁdence that we are 1 hop
away from destination. Details of the SRR algorithm (or CQ+
routing) is available in [8]. CQ+ routing algorithm includes (i)
reception of ACK and consequently updating C- and H-levels,
(ii) reception of non-ACK packets by checking for duplication,
loops, and pushing into the queue, (iii) transmission of data
packets from the queue by routing it according to the policy
in use. The CQ+ routing policy chooses the next-hop based
on the minimization of the information uncertainty and the
expected number of hops. This is given by
j⋆= arg min
j
h(i, j, d) (1 −c(i, j, d)) .
(5)
The next-hop j⋆is considered by the CQ+ routing policy
if it unicast the packet to one single node. However, the
CQ+ routing policy enables broadcasting to minimize the
next-hop information uncertainty. The CQ+ routing policy is
probabilistic and it assigns the probability of broadcast as
PBC = ϵ + (1 −c(i, j⋆, d))(1 −ϵ)
(6)
where a small value ϵ is used for the minimum probability of
broadcast (deﬁned for exploration purposes). In this paper, we
use the CQ+ routing protocol but modiﬁed unicast or broadcast
decisions using MADRL policy.
III. DEEP REINFORCEMENT LEARNING FOR CQ ROUTING
(DEEPCQ+)
A. Deep Reinforcement Learning Background
Our robust routing problem ﬁts as a decentralized partially-
observable Markov decision process (Dec-POMDP), that is
used for decision-making problems in a team of cooperative
agents [14]. Dec-POMDP tries to model and optimize the
behavior of the agents while considering the environment’s
and other agents’ uncertainties.
1) Policy Optimizations: Policy gradient (PG) method is
another popular choice that is based on the optimization of
the policy directly rather than estimating the expected return
and it optimizes the policy parameters by descending toward
the gradient direction of the expected discounted reward return
[15]. Particularly, we deploy a state-of-the-art policy gradient
algorithm called Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO) [16],
2
MILCOM 2021 Track 2 - Networking Protocols and Performance
32
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Texas at Arlington. Downloaded on June 27,2026 at 06:14:28 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

Fig. 1. Multi-agent network routing environment with shared policy param-
eters between agents. The centralized training and decentralized execution
are also shown. Each agent i, uses the shared policy πθ individually to ﬁnd
its own action ai(t) based on its own observations oi(t). The multi-agent
environment operates based on the joint-actions decided and taken individually
and transition to next state st+1 and the rewards are pulled out based on that.
which uses multiple epochs of stochastic gradient ascent to
perform each policy updates with ease of implementation.
2) Centralized Training, Decentralized Execution: In com-
munication networks, partial observability and communication
constraints necessitate the learning of decentralized policies,
which relies only on the local information at each agent.
Decentralized policies also avoid the exponentially growing
joint action-space with the number of agents, and therefore
more practical and faster to converge in training. Fortunately,
decentralized policies can be learned in a centralized fashion
specially in a simulated or controlled environments. The
paradigm of centralized training with decentralised execution
has already attracted attention in the RL community [14].
3) Parameter Sharing: A common strategy is to share the
policy parameters between agents that are homogeneous [17]
(parameter sharing). The multi-agent environment for the rout-
ing problem and our proposed framework are summarized in
Fig. 1 where the centralized training, decentralized execution,
and parameter sharing are illustrated.
B. Our proposed DRL Framework and Approach
We consider wireless communication networks with vari-
able sizes (e.g. 5 ≤N ≤50) with multiple data ﬂows. The
nodes are consistently moving at various random velocities and
directions. We used reliable MANET mobility models such as
Gauss-Markov model and/or random way-point for the nodes’
mobility. This is not the case in real operational environments,
thus we adopted more realistic mobility model in our study,
which is discussed in Section IV-A. At each time t, each node
i, picks a packet from its data queue (according to a certain
packet scheduling algorithm). We use a simpliﬁed ﬁrst-in-ﬁrst-
out (FIFO) packet scheduling but the routing decisions and
policy design are independent of this scheduling method. Each
realization of the network (also called an episode in the context
of RL) has at least T time-slots (each time step is single packet
Routing Protocol
C/Q-values
Broadcast
MADRL
CQ-routing [7]
✓
×
×
SRR (CQ+) [8]
✓
✓
×
DeepCQ+ routing (this work)
✓
✓
✓
TABLE I
COMPARISON OF ROBUST ROUTING PROTOCOLS IN DYNAMIC NETWORKS
duration time). Note that the packet duration time is assumed
ﬁxed but the data rate can still be different. An episode is
ended when the length of the episode exceed a maximum
trafﬁc length, Tmax, and all the nodes have empty data queues.
The incoming trafﬁc stops at Tmax and episode will end after
that when all nodes routing decisions are done (queues are
empty). The goodput is computed as the ratio of the number of
delivered packets to the total incoming packets in the episode.
We exclude duplicate delivery of packets at destination if it
happens. We train and use the same parameterized policy
πθ for every node (one policy for all), which helps with
the scalability of our framework. When the policy function
is deﬁned as a Deep Neural Network (DNN), the parameter
vector θ represents the weights of the neural network. We
train our DNN policy for a single network size, single data
ﬂow (single source and destination pair), and small range of
dynamic levels but the performance is tested and veriﬁed for
variable network sizes, multiple data ﬂows, and larger range
of dynamic levels.
1) Pre-processing of the policy input features: We select
only the best K (e.g. K = 4) neighbors out of total N −1
possible neighbors in the network for each node according to
their available C and H values. For the sake of simplicity,
we drop i and destination d from C- and H-levels and use
the next-hop as index (i.e. ct(i, j) := ct(i, j, d)). Now, in our
problem formulation the best K neighbor C and H values are
represented by
ct(i) = [ct(i, i1), ct(i, i2), . . . , ct(i, iK)]
ht(i) = [ht(i, i1), ht(i, i2), . . . , ht(i, iK)]
(7)
where the neighboring nodes i1, ..., iK of i are ordered so that
ht(i, i1)(1 −ct(i, i1)) ≤· · · ≤ht(i, iK)(1 −ct(i, iK)). (8)
2) State/Observations: We use a fully connected neural
network (FCNN) to capture temporal behavior of network pa-
rameters, we add the change rate between current observations
and previous observations as input to the DNN policy. The
input features to the DNN policy at node i are given by
ot(i) = [ct(i), ht(i), ∆ct(i), ∆ht(i), at−1(i), pt−1(i)] , (9)
where ∆ct(i) = ct(i) −ct−1(i), ∆ht(i) = ht(i) −ht−1(i),
and at−1(j) is the previous action of some node j that the
current packet is received from. The last indicator shows if
the current packet is received as a result of another node’s
broadcast or unicast.
3
MILCOM 2021 Track 2 - Networking Protocols and Performance
33
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Texas at Arlington. Downloaded on June 27,2026 at 06:14:28 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

C. Reward Deﬁnition for DeepCQ+ routing
In order to ﬁnd a good reward function, we use inverse RL
and learn from human-crafted rule-based routing protocol, i.e.
CQ+ routing. We design a reward that mimics the decisions
of the CQ+ routing and that will build foundation for our
ultimate reward function design. Now, consider a stochastic
routing policy π(a|st). If we set the rewards for unicast and
broadcast as the probability of those actions in the CQ+ routing
as follows:
rt(st, at) =
(
1 −ct(i, i1)˜ϵ
at = 1(broadcast)
ct(i, i1)˜ϵ
at = 0(unicast)
(10)
where ˜ϵ = 1 −ϵ. We expect that the performance of this
RL problem be close to the CQ+ routing (at least for small
values of γ). We refer to this as DNN-based version of CQ+
routing. Note that different reward designs will give different
performance objectives and gives ﬂexibility compared to CQ+
routing.
Although the CQ+ routing policy indirectly optimizes the
network overhead, it is not accounted for directly in its
optimization. We deﬁne the overhead in the routing of the
dynamic networks as the ratio of the total number of trans-
missions in the communication network, denoted by NTX, to
the total number of packets delivered, denoted by ND for a
speciﬁc packet data rate and a window of time. Hence, we
deﬁne the normalized overhead by the network size, N, as
OH = 1
N · NTX
ND . Other deﬁnitions of overhead are also deﬁned
as excess transmitted bits per delivered bits (i.e. overhead-1)
and total transmitted bits (both data and ACK) divided by the
total delivered data bits (i.e. overhead-2). In order to improve
the overhead beyond CQ+ routing, we deﬁne the following
reward function as
rt = w11D −w21Z −w3
Nack
N
(11)
where 1D is the reward for packet delivery. If a packet
is delivered successfully to the destination and node i has
contributed to that delivery then it will be rewarded. Also,
1Z is a reward (penalty) indicator which is enabled when we
have not received any ACKs from our transmissions. The next
term in the reward, i.e. Nack/N, is the normalized number of
ACKs received as a result of the action taken and therefore
closely represents the number of copies of a packet at other
nodes and the system overhead. The weights of the reward
components, (i.e. w1, w2, w3), have been tuned according to
the overhead minimization problem. The proposed DeepCQ+
routing technique with tuned reward function is referred to as
DeepCQ+ routing policy. The DeepCQ+ routing algorithms
are summarized in Algorithm 1.
IV. EXPERIMENTS AND NUMERICAL RESULTS
A. Environment Modelling and Training Platforms
We have developed an open-ai gym [18] environment in
Python that simulates the CQ+ protocol and used it in our
train and test process. The CQ+ environment has all protocol
features that are required for the training of the policy,
Algorithm 1: The proposed DeepCQ+ routing
Receive incoming packet at node i:
if Packet is ACK then
Update c and h using (3) and (4)
else
if packet traversed a loop then
Drop packet, do not return ACK
end
if packet is already in queue then
Find best next-hop i1 from (5))
Compute cack and hack from (2) and (1) using j⋆
Drop packet but return ACK
end
if packet is not duplicate then
Add packet to the queue
else
Do not add packet to the queue
end
end
if ACK Packet is not received then
Do not update c and h, (i.e. no packet is received)
end
if Queue is not empty then
Form the input to the DNN policy using (9) and (8)
DeepCQ+ routing: Choose
(
Broadcast
with probability πθ(a = 1|ot; θ)
Unicast
with probability πθ(a = 0|ot; θ)
end
including random dynamic network scenarios, data ﬂows, and
conﬁgurable network parameters discussed before. The CQ+
routing protocol contains the tracking, distributing C- and
H-values, duplicate packet checking, etc. The environment
is interfaced with the Ray, which is a powerful distributed
computing platform for the machine learning and RLlib library
[19] which provides scalable software primitives for the RL
algorithms.
In the MANET, there have been various mobility models
proposed along with various discussions on their impact on
routing protocols [20], [21]. The MANET mobility models
need to be realistic for the dynamic tactical wireless networks,
while still need to have enough randomization to cover corner
cases and extreme scenarios in our training. The random way-
point mobility model is often used in the simulation study of
MANET, despite some unrealistic movement behaviors, such
as exhibiting sudden stops and sharp turns [21]. The Gauss-
Markov mobility model which has more realistic movement
behavior and avoids often sudden stops and sharp returns
and has less sensitivity of the network performance metrics
with respect to the various randomness [21]. Our environment
region is divided the environment into 5 groups symmetrically
between the source and destination nodes. The closer the
region is to the center, the faster the nodes move. The central
region has double the speed variance of that of the mid-left
and mid-right regions. The source and destination regions have
half the speed variance compared to the mid-right/left regions.
The mobility of the MANET nodes is simulated and shown
in Fig. 2.
4
MILCOM 2021 Track 2 - Networking Protocols and Performance
34
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Texas at Arlington. Downloaded on June 27,2026 at 06:14:28 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

Fig. 2. Mobility regions and network topology. The movements of the nodes
are shown for a network of size 30 according to the Gauss-Markov model
TABLE II
LIST OF CONFIGURATION PARAMETERS AND TRAINING
HYPERPARAMETERS
Parameters
Value in Training
Value in Test
Network Sizes
12
5 to 50
Learning Rate
0.00005
-
Discount Factor γ
0.99
-
Episode Length
3000
3000
Region Size Scale
1
2
Dynamic Level Scale
1
5
Policy NN
FCNN(16, 8, 8, 4)
FCNN(16, 8, 8, 4)
Number of Data Flows
1
1 to 4
B. Numerical Results
Training and testing range of network parameters are sum-
marized in Table II with the hyperparameters used. Our train-
ing is performed over 50 million steps (over 15000 episodes)
and tests (where the results are shown in Fig. 3) are performed
over network sizes of 10 to 30 with larger dynamic level and
region scale randomization compared to the training. Training
is performed on single network size (e.g. N = 12) scenarios.
In our numerical experiences, N = 12 was the smallest size
network in which the training results was scalable well beyond
network sizes of 50. Fig. 3 also shows the the scalability
and robustness of our training and MADRL framework as the
performance of our designed routing policies are maintained
even with larger network parameters and conﬁgurations and
networks of as large as 30 (which are not trained for). As
shown in the ﬁgure, the designed DeepCQ+ routing policy
improves the goodput rate (delivery ratio) almost the same as
the CQ+ routing, and interestingly the designed policy needs
signiﬁcantly less overhead (types 1 and 2) resulting. Note
that large portion of transmissions are needed for that certain
goodput even if we have a centralized fully-observed optimal
routing solution and only portion of the total transmissions
should be considered as the overhead. Indeed, our MADRL
framework can adapt to accommodate different deployment
tuples of goodput rate, broadcast rate, and even delay, which
was not available CQ+ routing. Our results show that we
require 10-25% less overhead while achieves higher (1-5%)
delivery ratio (goodput rate), which shows signiﬁcant im-
provement over the baseline CQ+ routing algorithm. It also
contains lower percentage of broadcast transmissions saving
in resources. This overhead saving is only due to the policy’s
decisions on broadcast and unicast actions, while the next-hop
is still selected based on the CQ+ routing algorithm as 5. Note
that the testing and training network settings are different as
for every episode we use random locations, dynamic levels,
network area size, and data ﬂows.
V. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE DIRECTIONS
In this paper, we have demonstrated a successful MADRL-
based CQ+ routing protocol that is feasible to design a
robust, reliable, efﬁcient, and scalable policy for dynamic
wireless communication networks, including many scenarios
that the algorithm was not trained for. It is shown that
DeepCQ+ routing policy routing is much more efﬁcient than
CQ+ routing techniques, signiﬁcantly decreasing normalized
overhead (number of transmissions per number of successfully
delivered packets). Moreover, the policy is scalable and uses
parameter sharing for all nodes during the training, which
allows it to reuse the same trained policy for scenarios with
various network conﬁgurations. It is noted that the sharing of
parameters for all the nodes is not required during execution.
We are currently working to expand the action space of the
DeepCQ+ routing to include next-hop selection for the unicast
mode and use other MADRL techniques. Note that the focus
of this work was on broadcast or unicast action selection while
the next-hop was chosen based on the CQ+ routing. We plan to
use recurrent neural network units as policy which is expected
to capture higher gains compared to our current approach.
VI. ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
Research reported in this publication was supported in part
by Ofﬁce of the Naval Research under the contract N00014-
19-C-1037. The content is solely the responsibility of the
authors and does not necessarily represent the ofﬁcial views of
the Ofﬁce of Naval Research. The authors would like to thank
Dr. Santanu Das (ONR Program Manager) for his support and
encouragement. Also, we would like to thank the reviewers for
their valuable comments to improve the quality of this paper.
REFERENCES
[1] G. F. Elmasry, “A comparative review of commercial vs. tactical wireless
networks,” IEEE Communications Magazine, vol. 48, no. 10, pp. 54–59,
2010.
[2] C. Danilov, T. R. Henderson, T. Goff, O. Brewer, J. H. Kim, J. Macker,
and B. Adamson, “Adaptive routing for tactical communications,” in
MILCOM 2012 - 2012 IEEE Military Communications Conference,
2012, pp. 1–7.
[3] T. Clausen, P. Jacquet, C. Adjih, A. Laouiti, P. Minet, P. Muhlethaler,
A. Qayyum, and L. Viennot, “Optimized link state routing protocol
(OLSR),” 2003.
[4] J. Moy et al., “OSPF version 2,” 1998.
[5] J. A. Boyan and M. L. Littman, “Packet routing in dynamically changing
networks: A reinforcement learning approach,” Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems, 1994.
[6] R. S. Sutton and A. G. Barto, Reinforcement learning: An introduction.
MIT press, 2018.
[7] S. Kumar and R. Miikkulainen, “Conﬁdence-based Q-routing: An on-
line adaptive network routing algorithm,” in Proceedings of Artiﬁcial
Neural Networks in Engineering, 1998.
5
MILCOM 2021 Track 2 - Networking Protocols and Performance
35
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Texas at Arlington. Downloaded on June 27,2026 at 06:14:28 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

Fig. 3.
Comparison of the results of the DeepCQ+ routing trained for a 12-node network only versus CQ+ routing; The results are tested across various
network sizes from 12 to 30. Although the DeepCQ+ routing PPO policy is trained on 12-node networks, it scales perfectly for various network sizes. The
DeepCQ+ routing achieves signiﬁcantly lower normalized (divided by network size) overhead types 1 and 2 and higher delivery ratio and lower broadcast
rates.
[8] M. Johnston, C. Danilov, and K. Larson, “A reinforcement learning
approach to adaptive redundancy for routing in tactical networks,” in
MILCOM 2018 - 2018 IEEE Military Communications Conference
(MILCOM), 2018, pp. 267–272.
[9] R. E. Ali, B. Erman, E. Bas¸tu˘g, and B. Cilli, “Hierarchical deep
double Q-routing,” in ICC 2020-2020 IEEE International Conference
on Communications (ICC).
IEEE, 2020, pp. 1–7.
[10] C. Yu, J. Lan, Z. Guo, and Y. Hu, “DROM: Optimizing the routing
in software-deﬁned networks with deep reinforcement learning,” IEEE
Access, vol. 6, pp. 64 533–64 539, 2018.
[11] G.
Stampa,
M.
Arias,
D.
S´anchez-Charles,
V.
Munt´es-Mulero,
and
A.
Cabellos,
“A
deep-reinforcement
learning
approach
for
software-deﬁned networking routing optimization,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1709.07080, 2017.
[12] H. Ye, G. Y. Li, and B.-H. F. Juang, “Deep reinforcement learning based
resource allocation for V2V communications,” IEEE Transactions on
Vehicular Technology, vol. 68, no. 4, pp. 3163–3173, 2019.
[13] X. You, X. Li, Y. Xu, H. Feng, J. Zhao, and H. Yan, “Toward packet
routing with fully distributed multiagent deep reinforcement learning,”
IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics: Systems, 2020.
[14] F. A. Oliehoek, C. Amato et al., A concise introduction to decentralized
POMDPs.
Springer, 2016, vol. 1.
[15] R. S. Sutton, D. A. McAllester, S. P. Singh, and Y. Mansour, “Policy
gradient methods for reinforcement learning with function approxima-
tion,” in Advances in neural information processing systems, 2000, pp.
1057–1063.
[16] J. Schulman, F. Wolski, P. Dhariwal, A. Radford, and O. Klimov, “Prox-
imal policy optimization algorithms,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.06347,
2017.
[17] J. K. Terry, N. Grammel, A. Hari, L. Santos, B. Black, and D. Manocha,
“Parameter sharing is surprisingly useful for multi-agent deep reinforce-
ment learning,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2005.13625, 2020.
[18] G. Brockman, V. Cheung, L. Pettersson, J. Schneider, J. Schul-
man, J. Tang, and W. Zaremba, “OpenAi Gym,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1606.01540, 2016.
[19] E. Liang, R. Liaw, R. Nishihara, P. Moritz, R. Fox, K. Goldberg,
J. Gonzalez, M. Jordan, and I. Stoica, “Rllib: Abstractions for distributed
reinforcement learning,” in International Conference on Machine Learn-
ing, 2018, pp. 3053–3062.
[20] A. K. Gupta, H. Sadawarti, and A. K. Verma, “Performance analysis of
MANET routing protocols in different mobility models,” International
Journal of Information Technology and Computer Science (IJITCS),
vol. 5, no. 6, pp. 73–82, 2013.
[21] J. Ariyakhajorn, P. Wannawilai, and C. Sathitwiriyawong, “A compara-
tive study of random waypoint and gauss-markov mobility models in the
performance evaluation of MANET,” in 2006 International Symposium
on Communications and Information Technologies, 2006, pp. 894–899.
6
MILCOM 2021 Track 2 - Networking Protocols and Performance
36
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Texas at Arlington. Downloaded on June 27,2026 at 06:14:28 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
