ROMUC: A Robust Policy Learning Method for
Multi-USV Cooperative Tasks
1st Peng Li
College of Intelligence Science and Technology
National University of Defense Technology
Changsha, China
lipeng@nudt.edu.cn
2nd Shaofei Chen
College of Intelligence Science and Technology
National University of Defense Technology
3rd Ao Ma
College of Intelligence Science and Technology
Changsha, China
shaofeichen@nudt.edu.cn
National University of Defense Technology
Changsha, China
maao@nudt.edu.cn
4th Jing Chen*
College of Intelligence Science and Technology
National University of Defense Technology
Changsha, China
chenjing@nudt.edu.cn
Abstract—Multiple unmanned surface vehicles (USV) have
demonstrated signiﬁcant advantages through cooperation in com-
plex maritime tasks. However, in open waters, multi-USV systems
face dual risks arising from decision-making methodologies and
environmental uncertainties, posing signiﬁcant challenges to the
robustness of cooperative policies. To address this challenge,
this paper proposes a robust policy learning method ROMUC
based on multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL). Firstly,
ROMUC addresses environmental uncertainties by learning the
complete distribution of action values rather than scalar expected
values. Secondly, it employs value average and operator switching
methods to mitigate risks caused by inherent overestimation
errors in decision-making approaches, thereby enhancing the
robustness of cooperative policies for multi-USV. Finally, through
testing in two typical mission scenarios (pursuit and denial) and
comparisons with mainstream MARL methods, results demon-
strate that the ROMUC approach effectively addresses dual
challenges of environmental uncertainties and overestimation
errors, signiﬁcantly improving the robustness of cooperative
policies.
I. I
Index Terms—multi-USV, multi-agent, distribution reinforce-
ment learning, robustness, cooperative policies
NTRODUCTION
Unmanned surface vehicles (USV), as small unmanned
maritime mission platforms, are characterized by ﬂexible ma-
neuverability and high cost-effectiveness [1]. They have been
widely applied in various maritime tasks such as maritime
surveillance [2], resource exploration [3], and rescue/salvage
operations [4]. Due to limitations of single USV in endurance,
operational capabilities, and mission diversity, they struggle
to meet increasingly complex environmental demands and
highly adversarial mission requirements. Consequently, multi-
USV cooperative mission execution have attracted signiﬁcant
attention. However, in open waters, multi-USV not only face
uncertainties such as ocean currents, wind speeds, and reefs
that impact collaboration, but also confront uncertainties in














their own cooperative policies. These factors expose multi-
USV cooperations to high risks, making the achievement
of robust cooperation under risk conditions an extremely
7KLVZRUNZDVVXSSRUWE\WKHNationaO1DWXUDOScience Foundation
of China (62376280).
challenging problem.
In recent years, multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL)
has shown great potential by modeling the cooperative
decision-making problem of multi-USV as a partially ob-
servable Markov decision model [5]–[9], and has received
widespread attention from researchers. For example, QMIX
decomposes the global value function into local value func-
tions for each agent through nonlinear mapping relationships
under the assumption of monotonicity. It can learn good
policies in complex environments and achieve excellent multi-
agent cooperation performance in complex game scenarios
such as Starcraft. The decomposition method of VDN is
different from QMIX, as it uses a simple linear summation to
represent the global value function, which can also play a good
role in simple cooperative scenarios. Wang et al. [10] proposed
an adaptive adjustment method based on MADDPG to solve
the cooperative target intrusion problem in multi-USV. Li et
al. [11] achieved the target tracking task of multi-USV through
probabilistic data extraction and action constraint methods
Gan et al. [12] proposed a MARL method based on MA-
POCA and constructed an obstacle assisted pursuit framework
to improve the collaborative pursuit efﬁciency of multi-USV.
Wei et al. [13] proposed a multi-USV formation path planning
algorithm based on target based hierarchical reinforcement
learning to solve the planning conﬂicts within the formation,
and designed an improved artiﬁcial potential ﬁeld algorithm
during the training process to obtain the optimal path planning
and obstacle avoidance learning scheme for multi-USV.
However, the aforementioned MARL algorithms, while
demonstrating excellent performance in multi-USV tasks such
as target tracking and path planning, do not consider the impact
of risks on the multi-agent cooperative policy learning process.
To address the problem of robust multi-agent policy learning
under risk conditions, some researchers have conducted studies
from the perspective of robust MARL. For instance, Zhao



$PSSFTQPOEJOH BVUIPS
979-8-3315-8787-1/25/$31.00 © 2025 IEEE
1294
2025 Asian Conference on Artificial Intelligence Technology (ACAIT) | 979-8-3315-8787-1/25/$31.00 ©2025 IEEE | DOI: 10.1109/ACAIT67930.2025.11522108
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Texas at Arlington. Downloaded on June 27,2026 at 06:34:17 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

et al. [14] proposed a MARL method with random stopping
mechanisms, achieving path tracking for underactuated multi-
USV formations. Literatures [15], [16] simulated output per-
turbations by adding noise to action outputs, enabling agents to
access other states in the environment with a certain probabil-
ity. Zhang et al. [17] addressed safety challenges in multi-USV
mission planning by developing a method that employs deep
neural networks to map the state spaces of task allocation
and autonomous collision avoidance subproblems to each
USV’s action space, while evaluating the generated policies
through corresponding reward functions. Meanwhile, Ren et
al. [18] proposed a novel noise-added multi-agent proximal
policy pptimization method by injecting perturbations into the
input of advantage functions to enhance their generalization
capability, thereby improving the exploration efﬁciency of
cooperative policies for multi-USV systems.
Nevertheless, the approach of enhancing the robustness of
MARL methods by adding perturbations has evident limita-
tions: (1) it is difﬁcult to fully consider the risks brought
by various uncertainties in the environment; (2) it fails to
address risks caused by inherent errors in MARL methods
themselves. Previous work like the VAOS [19] method em-
ployed value averaging and operator switching to mitigate
risks from methodological errors, which achieved signiﬁcant
effectiveness in gaming scenarios. However, it only addressed
methodological error risks without countering environmental
risks. Perturbation-based approaches can only handle speciﬁc
disturbances while lacking capability to address other environ-
mental risks and risks stemming from decision-making method
errors themselves.
Therefore, this paper fully considers these two types of
risks in MARL, proposing a robust policy learning method for
multi-USV cooperative tasks, called ROMUC. ROMUC ﬁrst
employs the quantile regression method to approximate the
complete distribution information of action values, replacing
the traditional Q-value represented by expected values in con-
ventional MARL, thereby better learning various uncertainties
in the environment. Second, to mitigate policy risks caused by
inherent errors in MARL methods, ROMUC integrates value
averaging and operator switching methods to reduce overesti-
mation errors and improve algorithmic stability. Experimental
results on two multi-USV cooperative tasks demonstrate that
the robust performance of ROMUC method shows signiﬁcant
improvement compared to current baseline algorithms.
II. BACKGROUND
This paper models the cooperative policy learning problem
of multiple unmanned surface vessels as a Dec-POMDP
model. The Dec-POMDP model is deﬁned as a tuple G =<
S, A, P, r, Z, O, N, γ >, where s ∈S represents the true
global state in the environment where agents are situated,
and A is the set containing actions of all agents. At any
timestep t, agent i ∈{1, 2, ..., n} selects an action ai ∈A
according to its policy, thereby forming a joint action u =
[a1, a2, ..., an] ∈An. Under the joint action u and state
transition probability P (st+1|st, u) : S ×An ×S →[0, 1], the
environment transitions from state st to the next state st+1,
and the agent receives a reward r(st, u) : S × An →R
(with |r(st, u)| ≤Rmax). In the Dec-POMDP model, each
agent has a local observation o ∈O of the environment,
determined by the function Z(s, i) : S × N →O. Each
agent employs τi ∈T ≡(O × A)∗to represent the historical
information of observation-action data. The stochastic policy
πi(ai|τi) : T × A →[0, 1] represents the probability of
agent i selecting action a under τ. γ ∈[0, 1) is the dis-
count factor when calculating cumulative return. The learning
objective of multi-USV is to ﬁnd a joint optimal policy
π =< π1, π2, ..., πn > that maximizes the joint action value
Qπ(st, u) = E[
∞

v=0
γvrt+v].
Value decomposition MARL has emerged as a mainstream
framework for addressing cooperative multi-agent tasks by
explicitly modeling the relationship between individual and
global values. Its core idea lies in decomposing the global
value function into local value functions of individual agents,
thereby enabling efﬁcient joint policy learning to tackle critical
challenges in multi-agent systems such as credit assignment
and environmental non-stationarity. For example, VDN uses
a linear function to represent the relationship between the
two, i.e. Qtot(s, u) =
N

i=1
Qi(o, a; θi), while QMIX uses
a monotonic nonlinear function to represent it. It should
be noted that QMIX assumes the validity of the Individual
Global Max (IGM) principle, namely: arg max
u
Qtot(s, u) =

arg max
a1 Q1(o1, a1), ..., arg max
aN QN(oN, aN)

. The opti-
mization objective in the value decomposition MARL method
is to minimize the loss: L =  (ytot −Qtot)2, where ytot =
r + γmaxu′Qtot.
III. METHODOLOGY
The ROMUC method adopts a framework of centralized
training with decentralized execution. During the centralized
training phase, it coordinates the learned action-value distri-
butions of different agents by accessing the global state, en-
abling agents to specify policies using their own observational
information during decentralized deployment. We implement
the mixing of policy value distributions for all agents through
QMIX’s mixing network, which satisﬁes the monotonicity
constraint. Furthermore, in this policy network, we employ
an implicit quantile network to integrate environmental risk
knowledge into policy learning, thereby enabling agents to
generate risk-aware policies. The architecture of ROMUC
method is shown in Figure 1.
A. Distribution representation
We employ methods from distributional RL [20]–[22] to
represent the action value Qi as action value distribution
information Zi, where E [Zi] = Qi. By approximating the
agent’s action value using complete distributional information
of action values, we can more comprehensively learn environ-
mental uncertainty information contained in the action values,
1295
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Texas at Arlington. Downloaded on June 27,2026 at 06:34:17 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

Fig. 1: ROMUC method architecture.
thereby better addressing environmental risks. As shown on
the right side of Figure 1, the agent’s policy network takes
the current observation and action as input, then uses an
implicit quantile function F −1
z
(s, u|ω) = f(ϕ(o) ⊙φ(ω))u to
approximate the return distribution Zi, where F −1
Z (ω) denotes
the quantile function of distribution Zi on ω ∈[0, 1]. ϕ and
φ respectively represent differentiable functions that integrate
observation information o and environmental risk level ω, each
represented by multi-layer perceptron (MLP) networks. f is a
nonlinear mapping function that uses fully connected layers to
map ϕ(o) ⊙φ(ω) onto the estimated action value distribution,
where ⊙denotes element-wise product. And the MLP network
structure and parameters remain consistent with the IQN [22].
After
the
policy
network
obtains
the
action
value
distribution of each agent, we employ a mixing network to
perform the credit assignment process. Drawing inspiration
from
QMIX’s
monotonic
mixing
network
architecture,
we
decompose
the
joint
policy
value
distribution
into
individual agent policy value distributions (denoted as Ztot =

Ztot|Ztot(s, u) = F (E (Z1) , ..., E (Zn)) ,
∂F
∂E(Zi) ≥0

),
thereby satisfying the distributional IGM principle:
arg maxuE [Ztot (s, u)] =
⎛
⎜
⎝
arg maxa1E [Z1 (o1, a1)]
...
arg maxanE [ZN (oN, aN)]
⎞
⎟
⎠
(1)
B. Value averaging and operator switching
The concept of value averaging originates from the Av-
eraged DQN [23]. The speciﬁc approach involves approxi-
mating action values by averaging the outputs of multiple
policy networks of agents, thereby enhancing the robustness of
policy learning in multi-agent environments through variance
reduction. Speciﬁcally, value averaging refers to computing
the mean of the expected values from both the action value
distributions output by the global target mixing network and
the target policy networks of individual agents, as illustrated
in Figure 1.
ROMUC ﬁrst designs L target policy networks, then takes
the average of the outputs from these L target policy networks
as the input to the target mixing network, thereby reducing
the impact of policy network parameter randomness on the
output results, i.e., Zave
i
= 1
L
L
l=1 Zl
i. In the mixing network,
ROMUC decomposes the joint policy value distribution Ztot
and the target joint policy value distribution Zave
tot
into the
outputs Zi of all agent policy networks and the outputs
Zave
i
of target policy networks through a monotonic mix-
ing network, i.e., Ztot(s, u) = F (E (Z1) , ..., E (Zn)). The
target mixing network also averages the output values of
the K networks, i.e., Zave
tot (s, u) =
1
K
K
k=1 Zk
tot, where
Zk
tot(s, u) = F (E (Zave
1
) , ..., E (Zave
n
)).
The optimization objective of ROMUC is to ﬁnd a joint
policy that satisﬁes the Bellman equation: T ∗Ztot(s, u) :=
E [r + γmaxu′Zave
tot (s′, u′)], such that the joint policy value
distribution Ztot is optimal, where T ∗represents the Bellman
optimality operator. However, although adopting the Max
operator to select joint actions and iteratively optimizing the
joint policy value distribution can quickly solve for the optimal
joint policy, it may easily lead to algorithmic overestimation of
the true joint policy value distribution [24]. Therefore, to re-
duce this error, we employ the operator switching mechanism
from VAOS, which switches between using the Mellowmax
operator [25] and the Max operator when approximating the
TD target. This combines the strong exploratory advantage
of Max operator with the ability of Mellowmax operator to
mitigate overestimation errors. Operator switching refers to
alternating between the two operator selection policies at a
speciﬁc frequency:
ytot =

r + γ · mellowmaxu′Zave
tot (s′, u′)
r + γ · maxu′Zave
tot (s′, u′)
(2)
mellowmaxu′Zave
tot (s′, u′)
=
1
K
K
k=1 mellowmaxu′Zk
tot,
mellowmaxρZi = 1
ρ log
 1
c

a′ exp [ρZi (a′)]

and ρ is the
temperature parameter, c denotes the number of available
actions for the agent.
C. Optimization objectives
Under the distributional representation, the ROMUC method
employs the Huber loss from the quantile regression approach
1296
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Texas at Arlington. Downloaded on June 27,2026 at 06:34:17 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

to train the model, i.e.,
L1 =

|ω −I {δ < 0}| × 1
2(δ)2, if δ ≤1
|ω −I {δ < 0}| ×

|δ| −1
2

, otherwise
(3)
where δ = ytot −Ztot(s, u) denotes the TD loss, and the
environmental risk level ω is randomly sampled from a uni-
form distribution U (0, 1). Additionally, the ROMUC method
introduces regularization techniques that directly penalize the
joint policy value distribution Ztot when it deviates excessively
from the true value distribution. Speciﬁcally, an error term
L2 = λ

E (Ztot) −
∞

v=0
γvrt+v

is added to the optimiza-
tion objective, where
∞

v=0
γvrt+v represents the discounted
reward at the t-th timestep as a baseline to control overes-
timation errors, and λ denotes the regularization coefﬁcient.
Consequently, the optimization objective of ROMUC method
becomes L = L1 + L2, and the training process employs the
conventional CTDE framework.
IV. SIMULATION EXPERIMENTS
This section primarily tests the robustness of ROMUC
method on two types of multi-USV cooperative tasks. Through
comparative experiments with current mainstream algorithms
under both standard and risk conditions, along with ablation
experiments, it validates that the ROMUC method can achieve
multi-USV cooperative policies with higher robustness.
A. Experimental setup
Task description.
Pursuit Mission. Three Red USVs carried out dynamic
encirclement against a Blue USV in complex waters densely
populated with artiﬁcial island reefs and subsea facilities,
though the Blue craft maintained slightly higher speed than
its Red counterparts. Leveraging a distributed detection net-
work, the Red USVs established tactical coordination through
collaborative pursuit operations. They facilitated the formation
of an encirclement pattern by real-time sharing of hydrological
data and obstacle coordinates.
Denial mission. Two Blue force USVs breached Red force
warning Line by leveraging complex hydrological conditions,
employing coordinated breakthrough tactics to launch a sur-
prise attack on two Red force fuel depots. Four Red USVs es-
tablished a multi-domain awareness barrier through distributed
detection networks, executing interception in narrow, reef-
ﬁlled waterways. Exploiting two detection blind zones caused
by geomagnetic anomalies in Red force’s coverage, Blue force
USVs utilized obstacles for tactical coordination. Confronting
electromagnetic interference and adverse sea conditions, Red
USVs required efﬁcient cooperation to complete interception
of high-speed Blue targets within a limited time window,
validating the cooperative capabilities of multiple unmanned
surface vessels under adversarial conditions.
Environment settings.
This paper employs the MPE environment [26] to simulate
two types of missions, and veriﬁes the outstanding effective-
ness of ROMUC method in multi-USV operations in maritime
(a) Pursuit mission
(b) Denial mission
Fig. 2: Task.
combat scenarios by modifying the MPE environment, as
shown in Figure 2. To appropriately simplify the pursuit and
denial missions, the following assumptions are made for USV
modeling: (1) Neglect the inﬂuence of USV morphology, treat-
ing them as point masses; (2) Each USV maintains identical
kinematic performance parameters; (3) Consider collisions and
incorporate them as a universal reward penalty.
In the pursuit mission, three Red USVs cooperate to pursue
a Blue USV, with two identical rectangular obstacle areas
present in the environment. The observational for all USVs
includes their own velocity, position coordinates, distance to
obstacles, and distance to other USVs. The Blue USV’s ob-
servational information excludes the velocities of Red USVs.
The reward for Red USVs is represented by the sum of their
distances to the Blue USV-the closer they are, the higher
the reward. Conversely, the Blue USV’s reward is inversely
proportional to the Red team’s reward. In a denial mission,
four Red USVs cooperate to intercept two Blue USVs, with
the environment containing one rectangular obstacle area, two
circular detection blind zones, and two circular oil supply
points. The Red USVs’ observation information includes their
own speed, position coordinates, distance to obstacles, distance
to other USVs, Blue USV speed, detection range status, and
communication data. In contrast, the Blue USVs’ observations
replace the ”Blue USV speed” in the Red’s observation list
with ”teammate speed”. The reward for Red USVs is deter-
mined by the sum of distances from all four Red USVs to the
Blue USVs, with closer proximity yielding higher rewards.
The Blue USVs’ reward is inversely proportional to the Red’s
reward and additionally incorporates their distance to the oil
supply points. In both tasks, the motion of the USV only
considers velocity and acceleration in the x and y directions,
thus any directional movement can be derived therefrom.
Benchmark algorithm and algorithm parameters.
This
paper
compares
the
ROMUC
with
state-of-the-
art MARL algorithms (QMIX1), error reduction methods
(VAOS [19] and Sub-Avg2 [27]), and risk-sensitive algorithms
(DRIMA3 [28]). The hyperparameter settings of the compared
algorithms follow their default conﬁgurations. In the ROMUC
method, the hyperparameters are set as follows: the number
of quantiles is 10, weight λ = 0.05, temperature parameter
ρ = 10, and number of networks L = K = 10. We reported
1https://github.com/oxwhirl/pymarl
2https://github.com/Sub-AVG/Sub AVG
3https://proceedings.mlr.press/v162/son22a.html
1297
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Texas at Arlington. Downloaded on June 27,2026 at 06:34:17 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 







	









(a) Pursuit mission (standard)
(b) Pursuit mission (exploration)
(c) Pursuit mission (noise)
(d) Denial mission (standard)






	









(e) Denial mission (exploration)






	










(f) Denial mission (noise)
Fig. 3: Comparison of Algorithm Performance under standard and risk settings.
the results of three random seeds and represented them as
curves of expectation and variance. The code is executed on
a machine equipped with an NVIDIA GeForce RTX 2080Ti
GPU and a 32-core CPU. Typically, the training process of
ROMUC for both tasks generally requires 10-13 hours.
B. Comparison of Algorithm Performance
We ﬁrst test the performance of different algorithms under
standard settings. In the standard settings, the risks faced by
USV mainly stem from inherent errors in decision-making
methods themselves. Therefore, comparative tests on two
missions were conducted to verify the performance differences
among different algorithms in addressing risks caused by
methodological errors. The results shown in Figure 3(a)(d)
demonstrate that the ROMUC method exhibits highly compet-
itive performance in both pursuit and denial tasks. It achieves
higher testing rewards than other baseline algorithms. This
proves that the ROMUC method can effectively reduce risks
caused by methodological errors, stabilize the training process,
and generate more robust cooperative policies.
In addition, in the environment, we designed two risk fac-
tors: exploration and noise, to validate the robust performance
of ROMUC method. The exploration risk primarily involves
reducing the decay rate of the exploration rate, enabling
prolonged high-level exploration during the training phase to
increase cooperation difﬁculty. The noise risk refers to the
presence of a stochastic agent among teammates, which ran-
domly selects actions with a 30% probability when choosing
policies (a random cooperative policy). Under risk factors, the
collaboration of multi-USV needs to consider not only the
risks arising from their own method errors, but also the poten-
tial impact of environmental risks on the robustness of policies.
As shown in Figuree 3(bc)(ef), we ﬁnd that the ROMUC
method achieves optimal performance both under exploration
risk and in noise risk. This is because, compared to other
baseline algorithms, only the ROMUC method simultaneously
addresses decision-making error reduction and environmental
risk mitigation. Consequently, the cooperative policies learned
by ROMUC exhibit greater robustness when facing exploration
and noise risks, ultimately yielding the highest returns.
C. Experimental study on ablation
To verify the impact of components and parameters in the
ROMUC method on algorithm performance, we conducted
ablation experiments. As shown in the results of ROMUC
method and VAOS method in Figure 3(bc)(ef), we observe
that ROMUC demonstrates superior performance compared to
VAOS in both tasks under risk settings. This occurs because
VAOS only reduces methodological errors. Although this can
effectively mitigate the risk of overestimation, it struggles to
address environmental risks, which further demonstrates the
advantages of ROMUC method in enhancing the robustness
of multi-USV cooperative policies by handling both types of
risks. Additionally, we validated the inﬂuence of hyperpa-
rameter settings on algorithm performance by adjusting the
number of quantiles and neural networks. As illustrated in
Figure 4(a), the performance of ROMUC maintains a certain
degree of stability when the number of quantiles varies.
Figure 4(b) shows that while ROMUC’s performance improves
moderately with increased network quantity, the algorithm
efﬁciency declines due to elevated computational load.
V. CONCLUSION
This paper addresses the issue of environmental risks and
methodological errors affecting policy robustness during coop-
1298
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Texas at Arlington. Downloaded on June 27,2026 at 06:34:17 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

(a) Number of quantiles
(b) Number of neural networks
Fig. 4: The impact of parameters in the ROMUC method on
algorithm performance.
erative policy learning for multi-USV, proposing the ROMUC
method that integrates distributional reinforcement learning,
value averaging, and operator switching. ROMUC learns the
complete distribution of policy values to characterize envi-
ronmental risk impacts on policies, while employing value
averaging and operator switching to mitigate overestimation
errors in MARL. Experimental sections construct two typical
tasks with risk factors (including exploration and noise risk).
Comparative analysis with mainstream methods demonstrates
that ROMUC signiﬁcantly enhances the robustness of multi-
USV cooperative policies. Future work may require addressing
the efﬁciency of algorithms to enhance execution capability
during deployment.
REFERENCES
[1] Z. Liu, Y. Zhang, X. Yu, and C. Yuan, “Unmanned surface vehicles: An
overview of developments and challenges,” Annual Reviews in Control,
vol. 41, pp. 71–93, 2016.
[2] J. Li, G. Zhang, X. Zhang, and W. Zhang, “Integrating dynamic event-
triggered and sensor-tolerant control: Application to usv-uavs coopera-
tive formation system for maritime parallel search,” IEEE Transactions
on Intelligent Transportation Systems, vol. 25, no. 5, pp. 3986–3998,
2024.
[3] Z. Zuo, C. Liu, Q.-L. Han, and J. Song, “Unmanned aerial vehicles: Con-
trol methods and future challenges,” IEEE/CAA Journal of Automatica
Sinica, vol. 9, no. 4, pp. 601–614, 2022.
[4] J. Xie, R. Zhou, J. Luo, Y. Peng, Y. Liu, S. Xie, and H. Pu, “Hybrid
partition-based patrolling scheme for maritime area patrol with multiple
cooperative unmanned surface vehicles,” Journal of Marine Science and
Engineering, vol. 8, no. 11, p. 936, 2020.
[5] T. T. Nguyen, N. D. Nguyen, and S. Nahavandi, “Deep reinforcement
learning for multiagent systems: a review of challenges, solutions, and
applications,” IEEE Transactions on Cybernetics, vol. 50, no. 9, pp.
3826–3839, 2020.
[6] T. Rashid, M. Samvelyan, C. Schroeder, G. Farquhar, J. Foerster,
and S. Whiteson, “Qmix: monotonic value function factorisation for
deep multi-agent reinforcement learning,” in Proceedings of the 35th
International Conference on Machine Learning, vol. 80, 2018, pp. 4295–
4304.
[7] P. Sunehag, G. Lever, A. Gruslys, W. M. Czarnecki, V. Zambaldi,
M. Jaderberg, M. Lanctot, N. Sonnerat, J. Z. Leibo, K. Tuyls, and
T. Graepel, “Value-decomposition networks for cooperative multi-agent
learning based on team reward,” in Proceedings of the 17th International
Conference on Autonomous Agents and MultiAgent Systems, 2018, pp.
2085–2087.
[8] C. Sun, W. Liu, and L. Dong, “Reinforcement learning with task
decomposition for cooperative multiagent systems,” IEEE Transactions
on Neural Networks and Learning Systems, vol. 32, no. 5, pp. 2054–
2065, 2021.
[9] L. Pan, T. Rashid, B. Peng, L. Huang, and S. Whiteson, “Regularized
softmax deep multi-agent q-learning,” in Advances in Neural Informa-
tion Processing Systems, vol. 34, 2021, pp. 1365–1377.
[10] C.-C. Wang, Y.-L. Wang, P. Shi, and F. Wang, “Scalable-maddpg-based
cooperative target invasion for a multi-usv system,” IEEE Transactions
on Neural Networks and Learning Systems, vol. 35, no. 12, pp. 17 867–
17 877, 2024.
[11] F. Li, M. Yin, T. Wang, T. Huang, C. Yang, and W. Gui, “Distributed
pursuit-evasion game of limited perception usv swarm based on mul-
tiagent proximal policy optimization,” IEEE Transactions on Systems,
Man, and Cybernetics: Systems, vol. 54, no. 10, pp. 6435–6446, 2024.
[12] W. Gan, X. Qu, D. Song, and P. Yao, “Multi-usv cooperative chasing
strategy based on obstacles assistance and deep reinforcement learning,”
IEEE Transactions on Automation Science and Engineering, vol. 21,
no. 4, pp. 5895–5910, 2024.
[13] X. Wei, H. Wang, and Y. Tang, “Deep hierarchical reinforcement learn-
ing based formation planning for multiple unmanned surface vehicles
with experimental results,” Ocean Engineering, vol. 286, p. 115577,
2023.
[14] Y. Zhao, Y. Ma, and S. Hu, “Usv formation and path-following control
via deep reinforcement learning with random braking,” IEEE Transac-
tions on Neural Networks and Learning Systems, vol. 32, no. 12, pp.
5468–5478, 2021.
[15] O. Eberhard, J. Hollenstein, C. Pinneri, and G. Martius, “Pink noise is
all you need: Colored noise exploration in deep reinforcement learning,”
in The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations,
2023.
[16] A. Rafﬁn, A. Hill, A. Gleave, A. Kanervisto, M. Ernestus, and N. Dor-
mann, “Stable-baselines3: Reliable reinforcement learning implementa-
tions,” Journal of Machine Learning Research, vol. 22, no. 268, pp. 1–8,
2021.
[17] J. Zhang, J. Ren, Y. Cui, D. Fu, and J. Cong, “Multi-usv task planning
method based on improved deep reinforcement learning,” IEEE Internet
of Things Journal, vol. 11, no. 10, pp. 18 549–18 567, 2024.
[18] W.-Z. L. C.-X. M. C.-Y. S. Lu REN, Ya-Nan KE, “Multi-usvs coopera-
tive policy optimization method based on disturbed input of advantage
function,” Acta Automatica Sinica, vol. 51, no. 4, pp. 824–834, 2025.
[19] P. Li, S. Chen, W. Yuan, Z. Hu, and J. Chen, “Vaos: Enhancing the
stability of cooperative multi-agent policy learning,” Knowledge-Based
Systems, vol. 304, p. 112474, 2024.
[20] B. Mavrin, H. Yao, L. Kong, K. Wu, and Y. Yu, “Distributional rein-
forcement learning for efﬁcient exploration,” in International Conference
on Machine Learning, vol. 97, 2019, pp. 4424–4434.
[21] M. G. Bellemare, W. Dabney, and R. Munos, “A distributional perspec-
tive on reinforcement learning,” in International Conference on Machine
Learning, 2017, pp. 449–458.
[22] W. Dabney, G. Ostrovski, D. Silver, and R. Munos, “Implicit quantile
networks for distributional reinforcement learning,” in International
Conference on Machine Learning, vol. 80, 2018, pp. 1096–1105.
[23] O. Anschel, N. Baram, and N. Shimkin, “Averaged-dqn: variance reduc-
tion and stabilization for deep reinforcement learning,” in Proceedings of
the 34th International Conference on Machine Learning, vol. 70, 2017,
pp. 176–185.
[24] S. Thrun and A. Schwartz, “Issues in using function approximation for
reinforcement learning,” in Proceedings of 4th Connectionist Models
Summer School, 1993.
[25] Y. Gan, Z. Zhang, and x. Tan, “Stabilizing q learning via soft mellowmax
operator,” in Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial
Intelligence, vol. 35, no. 9, 2021, pp. 7501–7509.
[26] R. Lowe, Y. Wu, A. Tamar, J. Harb, P. Abbeel, and I. Mordatch,
“Multi-agent actor-critic for mixed cooperative-competitive environ-
ments,” 2020.
[27] H. Wu, J. Zhang, Z. Wang, Y. Lin, and H. Li, “Sub-avg: Overestimation
reduction for cooperative multi-agent reinforcement learning,” Neuro-
computing, vol. 474, pp. 94–106, 2022.
[28] K. Son, J. Kim, S. Ahn, R. D. D. Reyes, Y. Yi, and J. Shin, “Dis-
entangling sources of risk for distributional multi-agent reinforcement
learning,” in Proceedings of the 39th International Conference on
Machine Learning, vol. 162, 2022, pp. 20 347–20 368.
1299
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Texas at Arlington. Downloaded on June 27,2026 at 06:34:17 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
