IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL, VOL. 12, NO. 23, 1 DECEMBER 2025
49009
Mobility-as-a-Resilience Service in Internet of
Robotic Things Through Robust Multiagent Deep
Reinforcement Learning
Shi Li
, Graduate Student Member, IEEE, Jiong Jin
, Member, IEEE, Mahbuba Afrin
, Member, IEEE,
Xiaohua Ge
, Senior Member, IEEE, Jing Fu
, Member, IEEE, and Yu-Chu Tian
, Senior Member, IEEE
Abstract—The Internet of Robotic Things (IoRT) merges the
capabilities of robotics with the connectivity and computing
power of Internet of Things (IoT) technologies, enabling seam-
less data collection, processing, and exchange. This integration
enhances robotic systems with greater intelligence, mobility, and
autonomy, unlocking signiﬁcant potential across various appli-
cations, including sustainable agriculture. However, deploying
IoRT systems in unpredictable environments poses challenges,
such as network instability and hardware failures, which have
not been thoroughly explored in the literature. To address these
issues, this article introduces Mobility-as-a-Resilience Service
(MaaRS), a model that leverages the mobility of active uncrewed
aerial vehicles (UAVs), strategically relocating them to critical
points of interest in response to potential data collection failures,
optimizing resource allocation and enhancing system resilience,
particularly in smart farm scenarios. Additionally, a robust
multiagent deep deterministic policy gradient (RMADDPG)
method is devised to enable efﬁcient task allocation and system
recovery in the presence of model uncertainty, observation noise,
and reward uncertainty. Extensive simulations demonstrate that
the proposed method achieved a signiﬁcant boost in performance,
efﬁciency, and stability over the state-of-the-art.
Index Terms—Internet of Robotic Things (IoRT), multiagent
deep
reinforcement
learning
(MADRL),
smart
farm,
task
allocation.
I. INTRODUCTION
I
N SUSTAINABLE agriculture, developing technologies
that enhance productivity while reducing environmental
impact is crucial. The Internet of Robotic Things (IoRT), a
network of connected robots using Internet of Things (IoT)
Received 15 October 2024; revised 23 December 2024; accepted 11
January 2025. Date of publication 27 January 2025; date of current
version 20 November 2025. This work was supported in part by the
Australian Research Council through the Linkage Project under Grant
LP190100594, and through the Discovery Project under Grant DP220100580.
(Corresponding author: Jiong Jin.)
Shi
Li,
Jiong
Jin,
and
Xiaohua
Ge
are
with
the
School
of
Science,
Computing
and
Engineering
Technologies,
Swinburne
University
of
Technology,
Melbourne,
VIC
3122,
Australia
(e-mail:
103791828@student.swin.edu.au; jiongjin@swin.edu.au; xge@swin.edu.au).
Mahbuba Afrin is with the School of Electrical Engineering, Computing and
Mathematical Sciences, Curtin University, Perth, WA 6102, Australia (e-mail:
mahbuba.afrin@curtin.edu.au).
Jing Fu is with the School of Engineering, STEM College, RMIT
University, Melbourne, VIC 3000, Australia (e-mail: jing.fu@rmit.edu.au).
Yu-Chu Tian is with the School of Computer Science, Queensland
University
of
Technology,
Brisbane,
QLD
4000,
Australia
(e-mail:
y.tian@qut.edu.au).
Digital Object Identiﬁer 10.1109/JIOT.2025.3535148
sensors to collect and interpret data, plays a key role in this
transformation [1]. IoRT systems expand IoT capabilities by
enabling robots to sense their surroundings, make intelligent
decisions, and perform actions autonomously, offering greater
mobility than traditional IoT devices like routers [2]. This
dynamic interaction makes IoRT systems ideal for complex,
data-intensive tasks, such as precision agriculture.
Moreover, individual robots often struggle with large-scale
operations [3]. IoRT addresses this by enabling robotic col-
laboration, leveraging edge and cloud computing to overcome
storage and processing limitations. By processing data-heavy,
time-sensitive tasks at the network’s edge, IoRT systems
reduce latency and energy consumption [4]. This is especially
beneﬁcial in precision agriculture, where IoRT supports real-
time automation in operations, such as livestock monitoring,
with mobile systems like uncrewed aerial vehicles (UAVs)
improving overall resource efﬁciency. Additionally, IoRT
systems can beneﬁt from advanced cloudfog architectures,
which enhance scalability, resource allocation, and automation
in highly dynamic agricultural environments, as discussed
in [5].
A key goal in IoRT system implementation is resilience,
which means the ability to handle component failures,
changing environments, and other operational challenges [6].
Deploying IoRT in agriculture brings challenges like network
instability and hardware failures, which require resilient
designs to sustain critical agricultural activities under adverse
conditions.
For
instance,
in
livestock
monitoring,
low-
frequency sensors often struggle to reliably transmit vital data,
such as location and health status, to access points (APs) in
rural settings [7]. To address this, sensors can transmit data
to nearby UAVs equipped with onboard computing units for
processing. However, UAV malfunctions can cause unexpected
delays in data collection and processing. When data trans-
mission intervals exceed the UAV’s buffer storage capacity–a
situation we refer to as “buffer overﬂow deadlines”–critical
data may be overwritten or lost before it can be transmitted.
This highlights the need for resilient approaches that adapt to
data collection failures while ensuring efﬁcient and sustainable
agricultural operations.
To tackle aforementioned challenges and enhance IoRT
system resilience, an innovative model known as Mobility-as-
a-Resilience Service (MaaRS) is introduced [7]. This approach
strategically relocates UAVs to critical points of interest
2327-4662 c⃝2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artiﬁcial intelligence
and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Texas at Arlington. Downloaded on June 27,2026 at 06:13:01 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

49010
IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL, VOL. 12, NO. 23, 1 DECEMBER 2025
in response to data collection failures. Unlike traditional
approaches that rely on external resources or robot replace-
ments, MaaRS maximizes the use of existing resources,
allowing UAVs to swiftly adapt to unforeseen failures by
redistributing their tasks and responsibilities. This proactive
approach ensures fast recovery, minimizes downtime, and
maintains uninterrupted operations, which is crucial for sus-
tainable and productive agricultural activities.
MaaRS aims to enable each active UAV to autonomously
decide on task distribution in response to unexpected failures,
optimizing both time and energy consumption during recovery.
The dynamic nature of IoRT environments, such as smart farm,
where task locations and UAV positions shift, adds complexity
to the decision process, requiring consideration of varying data
demands. This service is modelled as a Markov or stochastic
game in a multiagent scenario [8], with a multiagent deep
deterministic policy gradient (MADDPG)-based reinforcement
learning method proposed to address these challenges.
Multiagent deep reinforcement learning (MADRL) is cru-
cial for improving decision-making and performance in
offering MaaRS for IoRT systems. Many real-world IoRT
applications, especially in agriculture, involve multiple robots
working together to achieve long-term rewards. MADRL
facilitates distributed task management, with each robot acting
based on local observations. However, existing studies often
use decentralized approaches, where agents independently
acquire task allocation policies. For instance, in [9], each robot
used deep deterministic policy gradient (DDPG) to reduce task
latency and energy consumption for computation ofﬂoading.
This kind of approach neglects the beneﬁts of multiagent coop-
eration. A common approach to these challenges is centralized
training and decentralized execution (CTDE), where agents
are trained collectively but operate independently using local
observations [10]. MADDPG [8], a leading MADRL algorithm
utilising CTDE, is well-suited for addressing dynamic task
allocation challenges in IoRT, particularly in agriculture.
Dynamic task allocation refers to the process by which tasks
are distributed among multiple agents in real time, based on
the current state of the environment and available resources.
This allows robots to adjust their task assignments dynami-
cally, improving system efﬁciency and response to changing
conditions. Although MADDPG has proven effective, practical
challenges persist. In reality, robots often lack full knowledge
of the system model—such as the reward functions of other
robots and the system transition dynamics—leading to model
uncertainty [11]. Additionally, agricultural environments intro-
duce disturbances and noise, affecting the convergence of DRL
algorithms, including MADDPG. Previous research has not
fully explored the resilience and consistency of MADRL in
noisy, real-world agricultural scenarios.
Consequently, there exists a signiﬁcant gap in integrating
robust MADRL algorithms to address practical multiagent
resilience challenges. This article ﬁlls this gap by proposing a
novel robust RMADDPG-based MaaRS approach for livestock
monitoring in precision agriculture. The approach utilizes
the mobility of active UAVs-dynamically relocating UAVs
to failed points for system recovery and task processing.
Model uncertainty is simulated through a virtual player
referred to as the nature player [11], which interacts with
agents to introduce a layer of complexity and unpredictability
into the learning process. Our simulations, based on real-
world data, demonstrated the resilience and consistency of
the proposed MADRL algorithm with the consideration of
observation noise, transition dynamics, and reward uncertainty.
The robustness is ensured by enabling agents to adapt to
these uncertainties through interactions with the nature player,
improving system stability and reliability in dynamic and
unpredictable conditions. The major contributions of this
article are as follows.
1) A MaaRS model is proposed for IoRT systems, lever-
aging the mobility of UAVs to provide system recovery
services and ensure system resilience in the context of
livestock monitoring.
2) A dynamic task allocation scheme is adapted from
traditional models to speciﬁcally minimize the time and
energy consumption of UAVs for system recovery.
3) A novel RMADDPG-based MADRL method is devised
to improve the convergence of the estimation process
for long-term reward and resource efﬁciency metrics in
dynamic task allocation.
4) A realistic observation noise model is presented to
evaluate the stability and robustness of the proposed
algorithms in agricultural scenarios. Simulations demon-
strate
signiﬁcant
performance
improvement
when
compared to benchmark methods.
The remainder of this article is structured as follows.
Section II reviews the literature. Section III presents the
MaaRS system model. Section IV introduces the RMADDPG-
based task allocation. Section V showcases the results and
analysis. Section VI concludes this article.
II. RELATED WORK
A. IoRT in Sustainable Agriculture
The ongoing integration of IoT and robots into everyday
activities has given rise to the IoRT, which redeﬁnes automa-
tion and data-driven decision making [18]. In the context
of sustainable agriculture, IoRT systems rely on fast data
acquisition and processing. A study in [19] examined using
UAVs to monitor livestock, where data was sent to ground
stations or satellites for processing, but the entire process
of data collection and processing was time-consuming and
communication-heavy [7]. Literature shows limited explo-
ration of how edge and cloud resources support IoRT in
agriculture to improve data handling efﬁciency [20]. Our work
extends this by proposing resilient IoRT systems through
efﬁcient data handling and task allocation for sustainable
agricultural practices.
B. IoRT System Resilience
Resilience is crucial for IoRT systems, especially in main-
taining functionality under adverse conditions [6]. The impact
of wireless network instability on IoRT resilience for disaster
management was studied in [21]. Recent studies emphasize the
need for robust systems to handle communication constraints,
hardware failures, and adverse weather, which are frequent in
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Texas at Arlington. Downloaded on June 27,2026 at 06:13:01 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

LI et al.: MOBILITY-AS-A-RESILIENCE SERVICE IN INTERNET OF ROBOTIC THINGS
49011
TABLE I
SUMMARY OF RELATED WORKS
agriculture and can reduce IoRT system efﬁciency [18], [22].
Task allocation in IoRT was explored in contexts like precision
agriculture [23], [24]. Our work builds on these by introducing
MaaRS, a novel model for dynamic task allocation among
UAVs to handle uncertain failures. By leveraging UAV mobil-
ity, MaaRS improves system responsiveness and efﬁciency,
reducing recovery times and energy use, which is critical for
ﬂexible and resilient smart farming.
C. MADRL and Robustness
MADRL algorithms like MADDPG consider the strate-
gies of other agents during training to promote cooperative
learning [8]. Recent studies have applied MADRL to address
multiagent IoRT challenges. For instance, Seid et al. [13]
proposed a MADRL-based scheme to reduce computation
costs while maintaining QoS in a multi-UAV IoT edge
network. A scalable MADRL algorithm for improving opti-
mality, robustness, and sample efﬁciency was introduced
in [25] for adaptive trafﬁc control. Despite these advance-
ments, ensuring the robustness of MADRL in practical
applications remains a challenge, often overlooked in theoret-
ical studies [11], [26]. Uncertainties in state transitions were
considered in [17] and an attempt was made to bridge the sim-
to-real gap in autonomous driving. However, the use of robust
MADRL in precision agriculture, especially under real-world
variability and model uncertainty, has not been fully explored,
presenting an opportunity to enhance resilience and reliability
in agricultural IoRT systems.
D. Discussion
Therefore, a tiered framework is proposed for smart agricul-
tural settings where UAVs, edge devices, and cloud resources
collaboratively handle data collection, processing, and anal-
ysis. This framework leverages UAV mobility to perform
latency-sensitive tasks by positioning UAVs closer to the data
source. To the best of our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst effort
to introduce a multiagent task allocation scheme based on
RMADDPG, leveraging UAV mobility within a UAV-enabled
IoRT system to enhance resilience by dynamically reallocating
Fig. 1.
MaaRS model for IoRT.
tasks during system failures. Table I presents a comparative
summary of works related.
III. SYSTEM MODEL AND ASSUMPTIONS
A livestock monitoring framework is considered in this
article as a use case for IoRT system, integrating key com-
ponents, such as a cloud data centre, an edge server, UAVs,
and IoT-enabled sensors embedded in livestock collars. As
illustrated in Fig. 1, livestock are randomly distributed on
the ground, with the collars collecting their current position,
health, and behavioral data. Multiple UAVs are utilized to
monitor livestock. Each UAV covers a disk-shaped area on the
ground and collects data from sensors on the collars within
coverage. After collecting data, UAVs provide preliminary data
processing before sending the data to the edge server, reducing
computational load and communication overhead. The edge
server evaluates the preprocessed data to identify which task to
execute and chooses the most appropriate UAVs for execution.
The cloud data centre is accessed when additional computing
resources are required for decision-making.
A. MaaRS Model
In a large agricultural ﬁeld, network connectivity varies
unevenly.
The
communication
system
is
susceptible
to
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Texas at Arlington. Downloaded on June 27,2026 at 06:13:01 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

49012
IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL, VOL. 12, NO. 23, 1 DECEMBER 2025
weather-related ﬂuctuations and constraints related to the
energy availability of edge devices and UAVs. UAV failures
caused by these communication constraints can lead to data
loss and impede the decision-making process, which can result
in signiﬁcant problems, such as treatment delays for infected
animals and risks during lambing for pregnant ewes. Such
delays can result in infections and potential harm to both
animals and their offspring. Therefore, if any UAV fails to
collect data from livestock collars in real time within the
sensor’s buffer overﬂow deadline, fast system recovery is
required for effective decision making to maintain livestock
health and well-being. In the event of data collection failures,
active UAVs are required to approach the data sources and
collect the data to facilitate system recovery. This approach
is known as MaaRS, which offers the mobility of UAVs as a
service to improve system resilience [7].
Referring to Fig. 1, the UAV labeled as R1 (aerial robot)
encounters a connection failure, which prevents it from collect-
ing data from the source labeled as S1. Then the UAV labeled
as R2, which is positioned beyond the communication range
of S1, relocates to a closer position of S1 and retrieves the
data, thus aiding in system recovery. The duration taken by R2
to move to S1 is referred to as UAV relocation time. The time
required for uploading and preprocessing the gathered data
is denoted as data upload time and data preprocessing time,
respectively. Subsequently, the processed data is transmitted
to the edge server for further processing and decision-making.
The interval involved is termed as data commit time. This
article concentrates on tasks arising from data collection
failures, leveraging the mobility of active UAVs to reassign
tasks for system recovery while minimizing time and energy
consumption.
B. Communication Model
In this system model, each UAV and the edge server
are connected via device-to-device communication [13]. This
study addresses the MaaRS dynamic task allocation problem
within a multi-UAV-enabled livestock monitoring framework,
considering two distinct communication models.
1) UAV-to-Edge
Communication: Unlike
ground-based
communication
systems,
U2E
channels
are
signiﬁcantly
inﬂuenced by the height at which UAVs operate, the elevation
angle of the communication path, and the speciﬁc propagation
environment [27]. We consider a probabilistic model for
the U2E communication link that reﬂects the likelihood of
having a Line-of-Sight (LoS) or Non-LoS (NLoS) connection
at any given time, which in turn affects the path loss and
the probability of successful data transmission. PLoS(t) and
PNLoS(t) are denoted as the probabilities of forming an LoS
or NLoS connection between a UAV r ∈R and the edge
server es at time slot t. Following [28, eq. (2)], PLoS(t) is
calculated based on these factors, while PNLoS(t) is derived as
PNLoS(t) = 1−PLoS(t). Hence, the average path loss between
a UAV and the edge server is represented as
PLr,es(t) = PLoS(t) · PLLoS
r,es(t)
+PNLoS(t) · PLNLoS
r,es (t)
(1)
where PLLoS
r,es and PLNLoS
r,es
represent the LoS path loss and
NLoS path loss, respectively. These path-loss values are
calculated using [29, eq. (8)].
2) UAV-to-Sensor (U2S) Communication: Given that the
UAV needs to approach the sensor’s vicinity to collect data,
the communication channel between the UAV and the sensor
is considered as a LoS channel in free space. The received
signal power PR and the path loss are represented by
PR = PT · GT · GR · ( λ
4πd)2
(2)
PLr,s(t) = ( λ
4πd)η
(3)
where PT indicates the transmitter power, GT and GR represent
the transmit antenna gain and the receive antenna gain,
respectively; λ and d denote the wavelength and the distance
between the sensor and the UAV, respectively; η is the path loss
exponent, which quantiﬁes how the signal strength decreases
with distance in the communication channel [30].
C. Task Model
Livestock collars are constrained by energy, storage and
communication capabilities [31]. These collars are equipped
with sensors to detect UAVs as they enter the communication
ranges. The collars continuously gather sensor data and store
it in their memory buffers. To prevent data loss from buffer
overﬂow, UAVs must periodically retrieve the data. Once the
data has been successfully transferred to a UAV, the collar
deletes the transmitted information. In situations where urgent
data analysis is required, UAVs can initiate real-time data
transmission to the edge server. For example, in the event of
data collection failures, immediate attention is necessary. Each
task generated during these failures is characterized by three
factors: 1) the location of the data source/sensor; 2) the size of
the data; and 3) a deadline determined by the buffer capacity.
D. Computation and Energy Model
In this section, details of task recovery time and energy
consumption are provided, which are essential components of
the system recovery process. The task completion time τx and
energy ex for task x ∈X are given as follows:

τx = τ m
tr + τ u
tr + τ p
tr + τ f
tr
ex = em
tr + eu
tr + ep
tr + ef
tr
(4)
where τ m
tr , τ u
tr, τ p
tr, and τ f
tr are UAV relocation time, data upload
time, data preprocessing time, and data commit time, respec-
tively; em
tr, eu
tr, ep
tr, and ef
tr are UAV relocation energy, data
upload energy, data preprocessing energy, and data commit
energy, respectively.
UAV relocation time indicates the time that the selected
UAV r ∈R moves from one location to another to execute a
task x ∈X generated due to system failure. UAV relocation
time τ m
tr and energy em
tr are deﬁned as

τ m
tr =
dlr,l′r
υr
em
tr = 1
2mrv2
r
(5)
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Texas at Arlington. Downloaded on June 27,2026 at 06:13:01 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

LI et al.: MOBILITY-AS-A-RESILIENCE SERVICE IN INTERNET OF ROBOTIC THINGS
49013
where dlr,l′r denotes the distance from UAV current location
lr to planned new location l′r, υr is the velocity of UAV, mr
is the UAV weight.
Data upload time refers to the duration for a UAV to collect
data from a sensor. Data upload time τ u
tr and energy eu
tr are
deﬁned as
⎧
⎪⎨
⎪⎩
τ u
tr = ζ u
x
λur
λu
r = Bu log2(1 + gs,rps(t)
σ 2u
)
eu
tr = ps(t)t
(6)
where ζ u
x is the data size of task x ∈X, λu
r is the link
transmission rate from the sensor to the selected UAV r.
We assume sensors adopt the time-division multiple access
(TDMA) mechanism to upload data to UAVs [30]. Hence, the
inferences from other devices are negligible in the same time
slot. Let gs,r indicate the channel gain from any sensor to the
UAV, and ps(t) denote the transmit power of the sensor. Bu
and σu are the bandwidth and the variance of additive white
Gaussian noise (AWGN).
Data preprocessing time is the time consumed to preprocess
the task at UAV r. Data preprocessing time τ p
tr and energy ep
tr
are presented as

τ p
tr = frζ p
x
Cr
ep
tr = frPrζ p
x
(7)
where ζ p
x is the data size to process, fr is the ﬁxed CPU
frequency of UAV r (number of CPU cycles demanded
to compute one bit of data), Cr indicates the computation
capacity of UAV r (number of CPU cycles per second), and
Pr is the power consumption per CPU cycle.
After locally preprocessing the data, the data is transmitted
to the edge server, the edge server will further process the data
for decision making, this process is referred to as data commit
time. Data commit time τ f
tr and energy ef
tr are deﬁned as
⎧
⎪⎪⎨
⎪⎪⎩
τ f
tr = ζ f
x
λf
r
λf
r = Bc log2(1 +
gr,espr(t)
PLr,es(t)Bcσc )
ef
tr = pr(t)t
(8)
where ζ f
x is the data size to be processed by the edge server,
λf
r is the achievable transmission rate (bit/s), Bc indicates
the channel bandwidth, σc denotes the average noise power
spectrum density, gr,es represents the channel gain between
the UAV and the edge server, and pr(t) is UAV transmission
power.
E. Multiobjective Optimization Problem Formulation
In the livestock monitoring scenario with |X| urgent tasks
generated due to system failures and |R| UAVs, we aim to
assign a UAV to each task to minimize time and energy
consumption in task recovery. There is a tradeoff between
these two goals, as minimizing time entails allocating more
power to data processing and transmission. UAVs move to
the vicinity of sensors to fullﬁl their assigned tasks. The key
TABLE II
SUMMARY OF KEY PARAMETERS FOR MAARS
parameters are listed in Table II. The optimization problem is
formulated in as
min
|R|

r=1
|X|

x=1
ατ ′
x + βe′
x
s.t. C1 : α + β = 1, α, β ≥0
C2 : τx = τ m
tr + τ u
tr + τ p
tr + τ f
tr
C3 : ex = em
tr + eu
tr + ep
tr + ef
tr
C4 : τx ≤δx ∀x ∈X, r ∈R
C5 : ex ≤φr ∀x ∈X, r ∈R
(9)
where α, β are nonnegative weights utilized to balance
time and energy consumption following system requirements,
respectively. In this article, we assume α = β = 0.5, reﬂecting
an equal emphasis on minimizing both time and energy
consumption. This default assumption provides a balanced
tradeoff between the two objectives, though the weights can
be adjusted in practice to reﬂect speciﬁc system priorities [32].
τ ′
x, e′
x are linear transformation forms of τx, ex to ensure that
all scaled data fall within the range (0,1), δx indicates task
deadline, and φr is UAV’s available energy.
A task x ∈X is deemed successfully recovered when its
cumulative completion time τx utilizing UAV r is less than or
equal to the task’s speciﬁed deadline, as presented in C4. An
active UAV is a UAV that has sufﬁcient energy to recover the
task, that is, the available energy exceeds or is equal to the
total energy ex required to execute a task, as in C5. Otherwise,
the UAV will not be available for system recovery.
IV. RMADDPG-BASED TASK ALLOCATION
The dynamic task allocation problem in IoRT is modelled
as a multiobjective optimization using a Markov Game,
with deﬁned episodes, states, actions, rewards, and transition
dynamics. The RMADDPG algorithm, within the MADRL
approach under the CTDE framework, is then applied to solve
the game and is explained in detail.
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Texas at Arlington. Downloaded on June 27,2026 at 06:13:01 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

49014
IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL, VOL. 12, NO. 23, 1 DECEMBER 2025
A. Markov Game for Dynamic Task Allocation
This study focuses on tasks arising from uncertain UAV
failures. The positions of tasks and UAVs are dynamic within
the system. The subsequent actions of UAVs, inﬂuenced by the
current environment, directly impact task allocation for system
recovery, following the Markov property [33]. The procedure
for minimizing recovery time and energy consumption is
expressed as a partially observable Markov game (POMG).
POMG is an extension of the Markov game framework that
is used to model environments where agents have limited
or partial information about the environment state. In our
scenario, there exists observation noise and changing transition
dynamics. Therefore, the ideal policy should not only be
capable of competing with other agents’ policies but also
resilient to potential uncertainties within MADRL model. A
POMG is deﬁned as a tuple in
⟨R, ¯S, {Ar}r∈R, { ¯Or}r∈R, {Wr}r∈R, P, U, γ ⟩
(10)
where R is the set of agents UAVs, ¯S represents the state space
with the presence of observation noise in communication-
constrained smart farm, and Ar and ¯Or present the action space
and observation set for each UAV r, Wr indicates the reward
of UAV r, P denotes the state transition probability, which is a
mapping from current state to next state. Particularly, the state
transition function is deﬁned as P : ¯S × A1 × A2 × . . . ×
AR × U →
¯S′. γ ∈[0, 1] is the reward discount factor [33].
The set U consists of domain randomization parameters
u ∈U that are used to parameterize the randomization
environment. Domain randomization is a commonly employed
technique in machine learning, particularly in reinforce-
ment learning, aimed at enhancing the resilience of models.
Speciﬁcally, U inﬂuences the state transition function P and
the reward function Wr for each UAV r. It introduces variabil-
ity in how the environment responds to the agents’ actions,
inﬂuencing both the next state and the rewards received.
It simulates the uncertainties and conditions UAVs face in
real-world smart farming environments. The formulation uses
simple uncertainty sets without requiring prior probabilistic
information. Agents focus on strategies that maximize out-
comes under worst case scenarios, considering both immediate
and future rewards. As a result, the Bellman equation can be
expressed as
V∗
r (s) = max
πr(·|s)

a∈A
|R|

r=1
πr(ar|s) {wr(s, u, a)
+γ

s′∈S
P(s′|s, u, a) V∗
r (s′)}
(11)
where s and s′ denote the current state and next state, a is the
joint action of all agents excluding agent r, ar represents the
action of agent r. According to the formulation of POMG, the
impact of uncertainty u ∈U is deterministic toward transition
probability P and reward wr. Based on [11], there exists a Nash
equilibrium (NE) in POMG, we can draw that there exists
V∗= (V∗
1, V∗
2, . . . , V∗
R) such that for each V∗
r satisfying
π∗
r (·|s) ∈arg max
πr(·|s)

a∈A
πr(ar|s)

k̸=r
π∗
k (ak|s)
{wr(s, u, a) + γ

s′∈S
P(s′|s, u, a) V∗
r (s′)}
(12)
the joint policy π∗= (π∗
1 , π∗
2 , . . . , π∗
R) is referred to as the
perfect NE for POMG.
In the livestock monitoring context, each active UAV, acting
as a decision-making agent, decides where to move and which
task to execute, and each UAV obtains a reward at time slot t.
Our application of the POMG model is described as follows.
1) Episode: An episode refers to the agent’s train-
ing process, encompassing a series of state, action, and
reward pairings, i.e., (s1, a1, w1), (s2, a2, w2), . . . , (sn, an, wn)
extending from the initial state s1 to terminal state sn.
2) Observation: At the commencement of each time slot
t, the agent obtains a partial observation of the environment,
which includes two parts.
1) The generated task proﬁle includes task location L(t)
where tasks |X| are generated at time t due to system
failure, data size ζ(t), and task deadline δ(t)}.
2) The UAV proﬁle includes location L′(t), maximum
coverage radius ψ, CPU frequency C(t), processing
capacity f(t), energy level φ(t), weight m, and speed υ.
3) State: The state space encompasses all possible conﬁg-
urations of the environment. Here, it is the summary of all
observation space of all active UAVs, which can be accessed
at the edge server.
4) Action: In each episode, the agent independently selects
an action, including the movement and the task to be executed
for system recovery {μ(t), ν(t)}, where μ(t) indicates the loca-
tion where the UAV requires to move to, and ν(t) represents
the assignment of task i to UAV j.
5) Reward: The UAV receives a shared team reward aimed
at minimizing the associated system recovery time and energy
consumption. The reward function is deﬁned as
wt(st, at) = −(ατ ′
x + βe′
x)
(13)
where τ ′
x and e′
x are scaled as time and energy consumption,
respectively; α and β denote the corresponding weights which
are adjustable upon system requirements, α+β = 1, α, β ≥0.
6) Transition Dynamics: The positions of active UAVs
remain
static
between
transitions,
while
task
deadlines
decrease at each time step. Once a task deadline turns negative,
the task is counted as incomplete. Due to the unstable
environment in smart farming, the IoRT experiences changing
transition dynamics, as deﬁned in (10).
B. RMADDPG Algorithm
In MADRL, applications involving multiple interacting
agents present unique challenges that single-agent algorithms
struggle to address. The complexities arise from the emergent
behaviors and dynamic interactions as agents co-evolve within
a shared environment. Value-based algorithms, which rely
on estimating value functions, face instability as a result of
the inherent nonstationarity of the MADRL framework. On
the other hand, policy gradient methods experience increased
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Texas at Arlington. Downloaded on June 27,2026 at 06:13:01 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

LI et al.: MOBILITY-AS-A-RESILIENCE SERVICE IN INTERNET OF ROBOTIC THINGS
49015
Fig. 2.
Proposed RMADDPG-based dynamic task allocation in IoRT.
variance as the number of agents grows. MADDPG-based
algorithms address these challenges by combining centralized
training with decentralized execution, fundamentally altering
the training and execution dynamics of agents [8].
The intricacy lies in the fact that the behaviors of individual
agents, the global reward function, and the state transition
dynamics are interdependent on the collective actions of all
participating agents. A key challenge is the limited accuracy
of each agent’s understanding of the true reward functions
and transition models governing the environment, leading to
a signiﬁcant performance gap between simulation results and
real-world applications. To address this and account for the
uncertainty inherent in MADRL scenarios, a virtual agent
known as the “nature agent” is introduced, acting adversarially
to all other agents [11]. The nature agent introduces a layer
of complexity and unpredictability into the learning process,
simulating the real-world uncertainties that agents encounter
during their interactions. We refer to the MADDPG algorithm
combined with the “nature agent” as RMADDPG algo-
rithm, making the system more robust to dynamic changes.
Algorithm 1 illustrates the RMADDPG training approach.
Fig. 2 presents the RMADDPG-based framework for a multi-
UAV enabled IoRT system for livestock monitoring scenarios.
Layer 1 serves as the application layer within the cloud
data centre, hosting various cloud service applications and
accommodating multiple application systems. Layer 2 operates
as the control layer and houses the edge server, responsible
for centralized management of multi-UAV system. Layer 3
encompasses a collection of UAVs. Each UAV is considered as
an autonomous agent in the learning process. This framework
operates with CTDE model, where each UAV acts as an
independent agent. The agents are equipped with an actor
network for decentralized execution, while a critic network
serves as the centralized training component. Layer 4 consists
of an array of sensors equipped on the livestock collars.
Sensors collect livestock health and location data and transmit
to UAVs.
The lower right section of Fig. 2 illustrates the training
process of multiagent policies. Each agent has an actor
network, a target actor network, a critic network, and a target
critic network. Each agent has a distinct replay buffer, storing
experiences speciﬁc to that agent. These experiences include
the agent’s own observations, actions, and rewards, as well
as the new observations. During training, each agent’s replay
buffer is used to sample batches of experiences. These samples
are used to train both the actor and critic networks of that
agent. The use of separate replay buffers aligns with the
decentralized nature of RMADDPG algorithm, where each
agent learns independently from its own experiences.
Centralized Critics and Decentralized Actors: Throughout
the training process, each critic network is provided access
to the observations and actions of all other agents, which
allows the critic network to evaluate the value of a given state-
action pair in the context of the full multiagent environment.
Nevertheless, during execution process, each actor network
only has access to its own observations and decides on
actions based on those observations. Actor networks do not
directly communicate or share information with each other.
These centralized critics play a pivotal role in stabilizing
the training process by providing a global perspective. Each
UAV as an agent receives global information from the edge
server. However, during inference or decentralized execution,
agents rely solely on local information, reﬂecting real-world
constraints where agents have limited system-wide awareness.
Another key strategy for stabilizing training is the use
of target networks. During training, these networks calculate
target values for the Temporal Difference error in the critic’s
update step. The actor’s update step relies on the critic network
to compute policy gradients. The target networks provide a
more stable, slowly changing target for these updates, helping
to mitigate the risk of divergence in the training process.
The lower left part of Fig. 2 demonstrates the training
phase of the nature player’s policy, which serves as an
adversarial environment generator. The nature player observes
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Texas at Arlington. Downloaded on June 27,2026 at 06:13:01 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

49016
IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL, VOL. 12, NO. 23, 1 DECEMBER 2025
Algorithm 1: RMADDPG for Dynamic Task Allocation
Input: Episode number K, training step T, discount
factor γ , exploration rate ϵ, replay buffer B,
mini-batch size N, environment status
Output: Optimal action sequence {at}
1 Initialize replay buffer B for each UAV r;
2 Initialize actor and critic network weights θμ and θQ for
each UAV randomly, then target network weights
θμ′ ←θμ and θQ′ ←θQ;
3 Initialize nature player’s network;
4 for each episode k do
5
Initialize a random process for action exploration;
6
Generate randomization parameters according to
nature player’s observation;
7
Update the environment using randomization
parameters;
8
All agents observe initial states s0 = {s01, s02, ..., s0R}
from the reset environment;
9
for each time step t do
10
Each UAV r selects a action ar by observing the
state;
11
Perform action a(t) = {a1(t), a2(t), ..., aR(t)}, get
reward w(t) = {w1(t), w2(t), ..., wR(t)} and
observe next state s′
t ;
12
Update nature’s player network;
13
Store transition (sr(t), ar(t), wr(t), sr(t)′) for each
UAV r in its replay buffer;
14
if step ≥N then
15
for each UAV r do
16
Sample a mini-batch of N transitions
randomly (si, ai, wi, s′
i)i=1,...,N from M;
17
Set
yi = wi + γ Q′(s′
i, a′
1, a′
2, ..., a′
R; μ′(si′))
18
Update critic network to minimize loss
L = E[(yi −Q(si, a1, a2, ..., aR))2]
19
Update actor network based on sample
policy gradient: ▽J ≈
E[▽μ(si)▽Q(si, a1, a2, ..., aR)|ar=μ(si)]
20
Soft update the critic and actor target
network according to:
θQ′ ←θQ + (1 −τ)θQ′
θμ′ ←θμ + (1 −τ)θμ′
the current state of the environment s and produces the domain
randomization parameter ξ for the subsequent training episode.
This parameter modiﬁes the environment dynamically, intro-
ducing new challenges for the MADRL agents and simulating
real-world uncertainties. To balance complexity and practical
simulation needs, the nature player’s objective is designed to
maximize the difﬁculty of the environment for the agents while
maintaining randomness [34]. The loss function is deﬁned as:
Lossnp = αnp ¯w + βnpMSE(oξ, ξ), where ¯w is the average
reward obtained by the RMADDPG agents in the environment
generated by the nature player, and MSE(oξ, ξ) measures the
TABLE III
SIMULATION PARAMETERS
mean squared error between the observed parameter oξ and
the generated randomization parameter ξ. Here, αnp, βnp ∈
[0, 1] are scaling factors that prioritize the tradeoff between
the adversarial environment’s difﬁculty and the randomness
of parameter generation. The nature player’s policy and the
main MADRL agents are trained simultaneously; as the main
agents adapt to randomized environments, the nature player
updates its policy to create increasingly difﬁcult scenarios.
This dynamic training environment adjusts difﬁculty based on
the agents’ performance, potentially leading to more robust
and generalized learning outcomes.
C. Observation Noise Model
Observation noise is introduced to the system to simulate
the realistic uncertainties that can arise from sensor inaccu-
racies and environmental factors, particularly communication
errors in smart farm scenarios. Communication uncertainty in
multiagent systems often stems from various sources, such
as signal attenuation, interference, transmission errors, and
delays, which can be collectively modelled as noise in the
received messages [35]. Gaussian noise is a well-accepted
statistical model to represent such uncertainties because it can
approximate the aggregate effect of many small, independent
and random disturbances, as stipulated by the Central Limit
Theorem. By introducing Gaussian noise with a mean of zero,
we simulate a scenario where there is no systematic bias
in the communication errors, while the standard deviation
reﬂects the intensity or level of communication uncertainty.
Let or be the true observation vector in the absence of noise
for UAV r, and ¯or be the observed vector with noise. The
relationship is deﬁned as
¯or = or · (1 + N(0, σ 2)), r ∈R
(14)
where N(0, σ 2) represents the Gaussian noise added to the
observation.
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Texas at Arlington. Downloaded on June 27,2026 at 06:13:01 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

LI et al.: MOBILITY-AS-A-RESILIENCE SERVICE IN INTERNET OF ROBOTIC THINGS
49017
Fig. 3.
Performance under varying (a) learning rate, (b) number of hidden units in MLP, (c) batch size, and (d) discount factor. To reduce cluster, only the
mean of each setting averaged over ﬁve runs is presented. Performance of RMADDPG against benchmarks (e) performance comparison of all algorithms and
(f) local trend of MADDPG versus DDPG.
D. Complexity Analysis
The RMADDPG algorithm stores transitions for each agent
in its replay buffer, contributing to the space complexity
(memory), which is O(|R| × B), where |R| is the number of
UAVs, and B is the size of replay buffer. The time complexity
of the training process is primarily inﬂuenced by the number
of iterations and the computational expenses to update the
neural networks (NNs), including each agent’s evaluation and
target networks for both actor and critic networks, plus nature
player’s network. The complexity in each training step is
O((4|R|+1) 	J
m=0 ImIm+1), where Im denotes the neuron size
of the mth layer in the NN with M layers, and |R| is the number
of UAVs. Therefore, the overall computation complexity of
the training process is simpliﬁed to O(KT|R|I2
max), where K is
the total episode number, T is the total training step, and Imax
is the maximum neuron size per layer in the NN.
For comparison, the multiple-deep Q network (MDQN)
algorithm in [7] combines Q-learning with n + 1 NNs, where
n evaluation networks and one target network are employed.
The overall complexity is simpliﬁed to O(KTI2
max), where K
is the total episode number, T is the total training step, and
Imax is the maximum neuron size per layer in the NN. The
complexity of RMADDPG is approximately |R| times that of
MDQN, where |R| represents the number of UAVs. This aligns
with the structure of the system, as RMADDPG is speciﬁcally
designed to handle multiagent scenarios with |R| agents UAVs,
where MDQN focuses on single-agent scenario.
V. RESULTS AND ANALYSIS
A. Simulation Setup
The deployment of multi-UAV enabled smart farm network
and parameter conﬁgurations rely on the work outlined in [7],
[31], [36], and [37]. The sensors of cow collars are randomly
distributed within the smart farm. UAVs are presumed to
maintain a constant height. The initial positions and the energy
availability/battery level of UAVs are randomly generated.
Utilizing synthetic workloads, a simulator is developed with
Python 3.8 and PyTorch 2.0, based on the multiagent particle
environments (MPEs) developed in [8]. Modiﬁcations to MPE
were made to align it with the requirements of our IoRT
system, including the dynamic task allocation problem and
the implementation of the RMADDPG algorithm. In our
RMADDPG approach, a fully connected NN is utilized for
actor and critic networks. There are two hidden layers in all
NNs with 64 units in each hidden layer. ReLU is utilized
as the activation function for hidden layers, while Softmax
is applied at the output layer. Adam Optimizer is employed
to optimize the loss function. The algorithm is trained for
5 × 104 episodes, with 25 time steps in each episode. We
set the replay buffer size as 106 and the mini-batch size as
1024. For the multiobjective optimization, we set α = β =
0.5, giving equal weight to time and energy consumption
during task recovery. For the nature player’s loss function,
we set αnp = 0.6, βnp = 0.2, which prioritize the generation
of challenging adversarial environments while maintaining
sufﬁcient randomness, as described in [34]. The related hyper-
parameters are listed in Table III. The performance of the
proposed RMADDPG algorithm is compared with decentral-
ized DDPG [9], MADDPG [8], and a heuristic algorithm that
allocates tasks to the closest UAV.
B. Convergence Analysis
The NN hyperparameters to train the RMADDPG algo-
rithm are selected based on their convergence performance.
Ten thousand episodes are considered here. The simulation
results are illustrated in Fig. 3. Fig. 3(a) demonstrates the
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Texas at Arlington. Downloaded on June 27,2026 at 06:13:01 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

49018
IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL, VOL. 12, NO. 23, 1 DECEMBER 2025
Fig. 4.
Running average rewards versus episodes at various observation noise levels and reward uncertainty levels. Observation noise level is (a) 1%, (b) 3%,
and (c) 5%; reward uncertainty level is (d) 3%, (e) 6%, and (f) 9%. The shaded region depicts the 95% conﬁdence interval obtained from ﬁve runs of each
setting. Each data point on the mean curve of accumulated rewards represents the average over 100 consecutive episodes.
convergence performance with varying actor and critic learn-
ing rates (lr). The learning rate is a critical factor in the
training process as it determines the step size taken in each
iteration to move toward the minimum of the loss function,
inﬂuencing both the convergence speed and stability. The
reward is analysed across four learning rate values, speciﬁcally
0.1, 0.01, 0.001, and 0.0001. While the learning rate is too
small (lr = 0.0001), the reward tends to ﬂuctuate and exhibits
a slow convergence trend. While the learning rate is set too
large (lr = 0.1), the reward has a relatively low value when
converges. We select lr = 0.01 for actor and critic learning
rates for subsequent simulations. This learning rate strikes a
balance between stability and convergence speed.
Fig. 3(b) shows the convergence performance with different
number of hidden neurons in each layer of NNs. The number
of hidden neurons is crucial because it determines the NN’s
capacity to capture the complexity of the task and learn
effectively, inﬂuencing both the smoothness of convergence
and the ultimate performance level. Three conﬁgurations are
compared: networks with 64, 32, and 16 hidden units. The
network with 64 and 32 hidden units exhibit very similar
convergence patterns, suggesting that they have enough capac-
ity to learn effectively from the given environment. Both
conﬁgurations rapidly recover from initial dips in reward and
converge to stable performance, indicating efﬁcient learning
dynamics. In contrast, the network with 16 hidden units
exhibits a less smooth reward curve, suggesting it is struggling
to capture the task’s complexity due to limited representational
capacity. Considering the reward values, we select 64 units for
the following simulations.
Fig. 3(c) demonstrates the convergence performance with
varying batch sizes. The batch size is the number of expe-
riences sampled in each training round, which affects both
the model converging speed and the quality of the converged
result. The simulation compares three scenarios with batch
sizes of 256, 512, and 1024. The convergence speed decreases
and the converged result increases, while the batch size
increases from 256 to 1024. The converged reward has an
increasing trend while batch size is 1024, indicating that the
network is effectively utilizing the larger sample of experi-
ences to make more accurate updates to the model parameters.
Therefore, we select 1024 as batch size to maximize the
reward.
Fig. 3(d) shows the convergence performance with differ-
ent discount factors. The discount factor is important as it
balances the immediate and future rewards, inﬂuencing how
far-sighted an agent’s strategy is in its pursuit of long-term
gains. Four discount factors of 0.8, 0.9, 0.95, and 0.99 have
been evaluated. When the discount factor is small (0.8),
the curve stabilizes more quickly and with less ﬂuctuation.
Conversely, when the discount factor is large (0.99), the
reward ﬂuctuates greatly before converges. The curve with
a discount factor of 0.95 shows smaller ﬂuctuations and a
higher converged reward, indicating a balanced weighting of
immediate and future rewards. This results in stable learning
while considering long-term consequences, making 0.95 the
chosen value for subsequent simulations.
The RMADDPG algorithm is compared with the MADDPG
algorithm, decentralized DDPG algorithm, and a heuris-
tic
algorithm
that
assings
tasks
to
the
closest
UAV.
Fig. 3(e) presents the performance of aforementioned algo-
rithms. Fig. 3(f) is the zoomed-in version, which presents the
detailed performance trends of the DDPG and MADDPG algo-
rithms. The DDPG algorithm exhibits a gradually decreasing
reward trend, indicating that although it initially acquires a
strategy, it has difﬁculty adapting and maintaining effective-
ness over time. This decrease results from overﬁtting to early
experiences or a lack of robustness to environmental changes.
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Texas at Arlington. Downloaded on June 27,2026 at 06:13:01 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

LI et al.: MOBILITY-AS-A-RESILIENCE SERVICE IN INTERNET OF ROBOTIC THINGS
49019
Fig. 5.
(a) Average time consumption and (b) average energy consumption
for different scenarios: no uncertainty, observation noise level 1%, and reward
uncertainty level 3%.
In contrast, MADDPG quickly converges to a higher reward
and maintains consistent performance across all episodes. The
heuristic algorithm maintains a relatively constant running
average reward throughout the episodes, reﬂecting its simplic-
ity and lack of learning-based adaptation. While RMADDPG
converges to a lower reward, it better manages uncertainties
and nonstationarity, which is essential for complex scenarios,
as discussed in the next subsection.
C. Uncertainty Analysis
We impose various levels of uncertainty on the observation
space values and rewards returned from the smart farm envi-
ronment. Fig. 4(a)–(c) represents the scenarios with various
levels of observation noise. The observation noise is modelled
according to (14), and the levels are 1%, 3%, and 5%, respec-
tively. This simulates a set of communication environments,
each with a ﬁxed level of uncertainty, challenging the agents
to perform effectively with unreliable information. As uncer-
tainty levels increase, DDPG and MADDPG struggle to learn
optimal policies, showing difﬁculty in convergence. Their
rewards decrease more sharply compared to RMADDPG. The
heuristic algorithm maintains more stable rewards. However,
its performance is capped due to the lack of adaptability
to dynamic changes in the environment. RMADDPG outper-
forms all other algorithms by achieving higher rewards even
under high uncertainty levels. The robustness of RMADDPG
enables it to adapt to the dynamic and uncertain nature of
the environment, maintaining higher reward averages with
less performance degradation. The overall time and energy
consumption can reduce about 28% with 3% uncertainty.
Therefore, with the presence of observation noise, RMADDPG
demonstrates a distinct advantage, maintaining higher reward
averages and exhibiting less performance degradation com-
pared to DDPG and MADDPG. This trend highlights the
robustness of RMADDPG when faced with communication
challenges in complex and dynamic environments.
Fig. 4(d)–(f) corresponds to different levels of uncer-
tainty in the reward function. A truncated Gaussian noise
is utilized to model the reward uncertainty, presented as
¯wt(st, at) = Ntrunc(wt(st, at); λ), where ¯wt(st, at) is the reward
with uncertainty, and λ controls the uncertainty level [11].
The uncertainty levels in Fig. 4(d)–(f) are 3%, 6%, and
9%, respectively. In the case where there is no uncertainty
shown in Fig. 3(e), MADDPG outperforms RMADDPG,
achieving higher and more stable rewards throughout the
50K episodes. This is because MADDPG is optimized for
stable environments with consistent reward signals. With the
presence of reward uncertainty, MADDPG and DDPG initially
perform better than RMADDPG, but after 10K episodes,
RMADDPG begins to outperform others. The overall time
and energy consumption can reduce about 10% with 6%
uncertainty. This suggests that the RMADDPG algorithm is
more adept at managing higher levels of uncertainty outper-
forming MADDOG, DDPG, and the heuristic algorithm in
such scenarios. However, when uncertainty reaches a high
level, the performance of RMADDPG is not as strong, as
shown in Fig. 4(f). While RMADDPG is more robust than
other algorithms, its ability to cope with uncertainty has
a limit. Excessive uncertainty beyond a certain threshold
hinders effective learning and adaptation, resulting in reduced
performance. In contrast, the heuristic algorithm maintains
stable but lower rewards, demonstrating its simplicity and
stability in the face of extreme uncertainty.
Fig. 5(a) and (b) presents the average time and energy
consumption in different scenarios. RMADDPG demonstrates
the lowest time and energy consumption, particularly under
observation noise and reward uncertainty, showcasing its
adaptability and efﬁciency. The heuristic algorithm exhibits
stable but relatively higher consumption, reﬂecting its lack
of adaptability to dynamic changes. MADDPG and DDPG
experience higher time and energy consumption under obser-
vation noise and reward uncertainty. These results emphasize
RMADDPG’s efﬁciency in managing task time and energy
consumption, outperforming DDPG, MADDPG, and the
heuristic algorithm, particularly in uncertain environments.
D. Various UAVs and Tasks Analysis
A comparison of performance considering varying number
of tasks and active UAVs is conducted. In Fig. 6(a), the
performance is evaluated for a ﬁxed number of tasks (20) with
varying numbers of UAVs (3, 4, and 5). The results show that
the reward becomes less negative (improves) as the number
of UAVs increases. This suggests that having more UAVs
available leads to better system performance, because more
agents are available to cover the required tasks, thus increasing
the system’s efﬁciency. In Fig. 6(b), the number of UAVs is
ﬁxed at 4 and the number of tasks varies (15, 20, and 25). The
trend indicates that fewer tasks result in a less negative reward,
which again implies a performance improvement. The existing
UAVs can manage fewer tasks more effectively, suggesting that
an over-saturation of tasks may strain the system’s resources,
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Texas at Arlington. Downloaded on June 27,2026 at 06:13:01 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

49020
IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL, VOL. 12, NO. 23, 1 DECEMBER 2025
Fig. 6.
Performance under varying (a) number of UAVs and (b) number of
tasks. To reduce cluster, only the mean of each setting averaged over ﬁve runs
is presented.
leading to a decrease in overall performance. In summary, our
ﬁndings demonstrate that the proposed RMADDPG algorithm
signiﬁcantly enhances system resilience in a livestock moni-
toring scenario.
VI. CONCLUSION
This article introduces MaaRS, a novel model to enhance
IoRT system resilience for livestock monitoring by leveraging
UAV mobility. MaaRS improves system recovery, ensuring
continuous and efﬁcient operation—crucial for sustainable
agriculture. A robust RMADDPG algorithm is developed
using a Markov game for dynamic task allocation. The
algorithm, with centralized critics, decentralized actors and
a nature player, adapts to environmental uncertainties, such
as observational noises, changing transition dynamics, and
reward uncertainty. Our results show MaaRS signiﬁcantly
enhances system resilience and optimizes resource use, con-
tributing to more sustainable agricultural practices. Future
work will focus on improving MADRL robustness and
extending MaaRS to handle more complex agricultural tasks.
Integrating heterogeneous agents, such as ground robots along
with UAVs, will enhance system adaptability in diverse envi-
ronments. Real-world deployment studies will validate system
performance under challenges like varying weather and com-
munication delays. Additionally, optimizing energy-efﬁcient
task allocation strategies will further enhance UAV operational
sustainability. These advancements will ensure MaaRS meets
practical needs for smart and resilient agricultural systems.
REFERENCES
[1] R. S. Batth, A. Nayyar, and A. Nagpal, “Internet of Robotic Things:
Driving intelligent robotics of future- concept, architecture, applications
and technologies,” in Proc. 4th Int. Conf. Comput. Sci. (ICCS), 2018,
pp. 151–160.
[2] M. Afrin, J. Jin, A. Rahman, A. Rahman, J. Wan, and E. Hossain,
“Resource allocation and service provisioning in multi-agent cloud
robotics: A comprehensive survey,” IEEE Commun. Surveys Tuts.,
vol. 23, no. 2, pp. 842–870, 2nd Quart., 2021.
[3] J. Xu, K. Ota, and M. Dong, “Aerial edge computing: Flying attitude-
aware collaboration for multi-UAV,” IEEE Trans. Mobile Comput.,
vol. 22, no. 10, pp. 5706–5718, Oct. 2023.
[4] N. Ahmed, D. De, and I. Hussain, “Internet of Things (IoT) for smart
precision agriculture and farming in rural areas,” IEEE Internet Things
J., vol. 5, no. 6, pp. 4890–4899, Dec. 2018.
[5] J. Jin, K. Yu, J. Kua, N. Zhang, Z. Pang, and Q.-L. Han, “Cloud-
fog automation: Vision, enabling technologies, and future research
directions,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 20, no. 2, pp. 1039–1054,
Feb. 2024.
[6] A. Prorok, V. Kumar, B. Sadler, and G. Sukhatme, “Introduction to the
special section on resilience in networked robotic systems,” IEEE Trans.
Robot., vol. 38, no. 1, pp. 2–4, Feb. 2022.
[7] M. Afrin, J. Jin, A. Rahman, S. Li, Y.-C. Tian, and Y. Li, “Dynamic task
allocation for robotic edge system resilience using deep reinforcement
learning,” IEEE Trans. Syst., Man, Cybern., Syst., vol. 54, no. 3,
pp. 1438–1450, Mar. 2024.
[8] R. Lowe, Y. Wu, A. Tamar, J. Harb, P. Abbeel, and I. Mordatch,
“Multi-agent actor-critic for mixed cooperative-competitive environ-
ments,” in Proc. 31st Int. Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Syst. (NeurIPS),
vol. 30, 2017, pp. 6382–6393.
[9] Z. Chen and X. Wang, “Decentralized computation ofﬂoading for
multi-user mobile edge computing: A deep reinforcement learning
approach,” EURASIP J. Wireless Commun. Netw., vol. 2020, no. 188,
pp. 1–21, 2020.
[10] C. Dai, K. Zhu, and E. Hossain, “Multi-agent deep reinforcement
learning for joint decoupled user association and trajectory design in
full-duplex multi-UAV networks,” IEEE Trans. Mobile Comput., vol. 22,
no. 10, pp. 6056–6070, Oct. 2023.
[11] K. Zhang, T. Sun, Y. Tao, S. Genc, S. Mallya, and T. Basar,
“Robust
multi-agent
reinforcement
learning
with
model
uncer-
tainty,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst. (NeurIPS), vol. 33, 2020,
pp. 10571–10583.
[12] G. Notomista et al., “A resilient and energy-aware task allocation
framework for heterogeneous multirobot systems,” IEEE Trans. Robot.,
vol. 38, no. 1, pp. 159–179, Feb. 2022.
[13] A. M. Seid, G. O. Boateng, B. Mareri, G. Sun, and W. Jiang, “Multi-
agent DRL for task ofﬂoading and resource allocation in multi-UAV
enabled IoT edge network,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Service Manag., vol. 18,
no. 4, pp. 4531–4547, Dec. 2021.
[14] J. Cui, Y. Liu, and A. Nallanathan, “Multi-agent reinforcement learning-
based resource allocation for UAV networks,” IEEE Trans. Wireless
Commun., vol. 19, no. 2, pp. 729–743, Feb. 2020.
[15] E. Wang et al., “Joint charging and relocation recommendation for
e-taxi drivers via multi-agent mean ﬁeld hierarchical reinforcement
learning,” IEEE Trans. Mobile Comput., vol. 21, no. 4, pp. 1274–1290,
Apr. 2022.
[16] S. He, Y. Wang, S. Han, S. Zou, and F. Miao, “A robust and constrained
multi-agent reinforcement learning electric vehicle rebalancing method
in AMoD systems,” in Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst.
(IROS), 2023, pp. 5637–5644.
[17] E. Candela, L. Parada, L. Marques, T.-A. Georgescu, Y. Demiris, and
P. Angeloudis, “Transferring multi-agent reinforcement learning policies
for autonomous driving using sim-to-real,” in Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf.
Intell. Robots Syst. (IROS), 2022, pp. 8814–8820.
[18] S. Sarker et al., “FOLD: Fog-dew infrastructure-aided optimal workload
distribution for cloud robotic operations,” Internet Things, vol. 26,
Jul. 2024, Art. no. 101185.
[19] X. Li and L. Xing, “Use of unmanned aerial vehicles for livestock mon-
itoring based on streaming k-means clustering,” IFAC-PapersOnLine,
vol. 52, no. 30, pp. 324–329, 2019.
[20] T. Ojha, S. Misra, and N. S. Raghuwanshi, “Internet of Things for
agricultural applications: The state of the art,” IEEE Internet Things J.,
vol. 8, no. 14, pp. 10973–10997, Jul. 2021.
[21] X. Guan et al., “ROG: A high performance and robust distributed
training system for robotic IoT,” in Proc. 55th IEEE/ACM Int. Symp.
Microarchit. (MICRO), 2022, pp. 336–353.
[22] X. Tian, M. Afrin, S. Mistry, R. Mahmud, A. Krishna, and Y. Li,
“MURE: Multi-layer real-time livestock management architecture with
unmanned aerial vehicles using deep reinforcement learning,” Future
Gener. Comput. Syst., vol. 161, pp. 454–466, Dec. 2024.
[23] N. Seenu, R. M. K. Chetty, M. Ramya, and M. N. Janardhanan, “Review
on state-of-the-art dynamic task allocation strategies for multiple-
robot systems,” Ind. Robot, Int. J. Robot. Res. Appl., vol. 47, no. 6,
pp. 929–942, 2020.
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Texas at Arlington. Downloaded on June 27,2026 at 06:13:01 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

LI et al.: MOBILITY-AS-A-RESILIENCE SERVICE IN INTERNET OF ROBOTIC THINGS
49021
[24] M. Santilli, R. F. Carpio, and A. Gasparri, “A framework for tasks
allocation and scheduling in precision agriculture settings,” in Proc. 20th
Int. Conf. Adv. Robot. (ICAR), 2021, pp. 996–1002.
[25] T. Chu, J. Wang, L. Codecà, and Z. Li, “Multi-agent deep reinforcement
learning for large-scale trafﬁc signal control,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp.
Syst., vol. 21, no. 3, pp. 1086–1095, Mar. 2020.
[26] Y. Wang and S. Zou, “Online robust reinforcement learning with model
uncertainty,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst. (NeurIPS), vol. 34,
2021, pp. 7193–7206.
[27] S. Chandrasekharan et al., “Designing and implementing future aerial
communication networks,” IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 54, no. 5,
pp. 26–34, May 2016.
[28] H. Kang, J. Joung, and J. Kang, “A study on probabilistic line-of-
sight air-to-ground channel models,” in Proc. 34th Int. Tech. Conf.
Circuits/Syst., Comput. Commun. (ITC-CSCC), 2019, pp. 1–2.
[29] A. Al-Hourani, S. Kandeepan, and S. Lardner, “Optimal LAP altitude
for maximum coverage,” IEEE Wireless Commun. Lett., vol. 3, no. 6,
pp. 569–572, Dec. 2014.
[30] M. T. Nguyen et al., “UAV-assisted data collection in wireless sensor
networks: A comprehensive survey,” Electronics, vol. 10, no. 21,
p. 2603, 2021.
[31] M. A. Alanezi, M. S. Shahriar, M. B. Hasan, S. Ahmed, Y. A. Sha’aban,
and H. R. H. Bouchekara, “Livestock management with unmanned aerial
vehicles: A review,” IEEE Access, vol. 10, pp. 45001–45028, 2022.
[32] K. Van Moffaert and A. Nowé, “Multi-objective reinforcement learning
using sets of Pareto dominating policies,” J. Mach. Learn. Res., vol. 15,
no. 1, pp. 3483–3512, 2014.
[33] R. S. Sutton and A. G. Barto, Reinforcement Learning: An Introduction.
Cambridge, MA, USA: MIT Press, 2018.
[34] S. Chen, G. Liu, Z. Zhou, K. Zhang, and J. Wang, “Robust multi-
agent reinforcement learning method based on adversarial domain
randomization for real-world dual-UAV cooperation,” IEEE Trans. Intell.
Veh., vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 1615–1627, Jan. 2024.
[35] A. Bukharin et al., “Robust multi-agent reinforcement learning via
adversarial regularization: Theoretical foundation and stable algo-
rithms,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst. (NeurIPS), vol. 36, 2023,
pp. 68121–68133.
[36] M. Afrin, J. Jin, A. Rahman, A. Gasparri, Y.-C. Tian, and A. Kulkarni,
“Robotic edge resource allocation for agricultural cyber-physical
system,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Sci. Eng., vol. 9, no. 6, pp. 3979–3990,
Nov./Dec. 2022.
[37] J. Li, Q. Liu, P. Wu, F. Shu, and S. Jin, “Task ofﬂoading for UAV-
based mobile edge computing via deep reinforcement learning,” in Proc.
IEEE/CIC Int. Conf. Commun. China (ICCC), 2018, pp. 798–802.
Shi Li (Graduate Student Member, IEEE) received the B.E. degree (Hons.)
in electrical and electronic engineering and the M.E. degree in telecommu-
nications engineering from the University of Melbourne, Melbourne, VIC,
Australia in 2014 and 2015, respectively. She is currently pursuing the Ph.D.
degree in information and communication technology with the School of
Science, Computing and Engineering Technologies, Swinburne University
of Technology, Melbourne. Her research interests include multiagent cloud
robotics and deep reinforcement learning.
Jiong Jin (Member, IEEE) received the B.E. degree (with First-Class Hons.)
in computer engineering from Nanyang Technological University, Singapore,
in 2006, and the Ph.D. degree in electrical and electronic engineering from
the University of Melbourne, Melbourne, VIC, Australia, in 2011.
He is currently a Full Professor with the School of Science, Computing and
Engineering Technologies, Swinburne University of Technology, Melbourne.
His research interests include network design and optimization, edge com-
puting and intelligence, robotics and automation, and cyber–physical systems
and Internet of Things as well as their applications in smart manufacturing,
smart transportation, and smart cities.
Prof. Jin was recognized as an Honorable Mention in the AI 2000 Most
Inﬂuential Scholars List in IoT in 2021 and 2022. He is currently an Associate
Editor of IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS.
Mahbuba Afrin (Member, IEEE) received the Ph.D. degree from Swinburne
University of Technology, Melbourne, VIC, Australia, in 2021, receiving
CSIRO Data61 Scholarship.
She is working as a Lecturer with the School of Electrical Engineering,
Computing and Mathematical Sciences, Curtin University, Perth, WA,
Australia. Previously, she worked as a Vice-Chancellor’s Postdoctoral
Research Fellow with the University of Southern Queensland, Toowoomba,
QLD, Australia. With expertise in networked robotics and the Internet of
Things-enabled cyber–physical Systems, her research focuses on developing
efﬁcient learning models for intelligent systems.
Dr. Afrin is the Secretary of IEEE Communications Society, WA Chapter.
Xiaohua Ge (Senior Member, IEEE) received the Ph.D. degree in com-
puter engineering from Central Queensland University, Rockhampton, QLD,
Australia, in 2014.
From 2015 to 2017, he was a Research Fellow with the Grifﬁth School
of Engineering, Grifﬁth University, Gold Coast, QLD, Australia. He is
currently a Senior Lecturer with the School of Science, Computing and
Engineering Technologies, Swinburne University of Technology, Melbourne,
VIC, Australia. His research interests include networked, secure, and intelli-
gent control and estimation theories, and their applications in mobile robots,
electric vehicles, autonomous road and rail vehicles, connected vehicles, and
intelligent transportation systems.
Dr. Ge is currently an Associate Editor of IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON
INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SYSTEMS, MAN,
AND CYBERNETICS: SYSTEMS, IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT
VEHICLES, and IEEE/CAA JOURNAL OF AUTOMATICA SINICA. He was an
Associate Editor of IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS II:
EXPRESS BRIEFS and a Guest Editor of several prestigious journals, such as
Vehicle System Dynamics and Control Engineering Practice.
Jing Fu (Member, IEEE) received the B.Eng. degree in computer science
from Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China, in 2011, and the Ph.D.
degree in electronic engineering from the City University of Hong Kong,
Hong Kong, in 2016.
She is with the School of Mathematics and Statistics, University
of Melbourne, Melbourne, VIC, Australia, as a Postdoctoral Research
Associate from 2016 to 2019. She is currently with RMIT University,
Melbourne, as a Lecturer. Her research interests include energy-efﬁcient
networking/scheduling, resource allocation in large-scale networks, restless
multiarmed bandit problems, and stochastic optimization.
Yu-Chu Tian (Senior Member, IEEE) received the Ph.D. degree in computer
and software engineering from the University of Sydney, Sydney, NSW,
Australia, in 2009, and the Ph.D. degree in industrial automation from
Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China, in 1993.
He is currently a Professor with the School of Computer Science,
Queensland University of Technology, Brisbane, QLD, Australia. His research
interests include big data computing, cloud computing, artiﬁcial intelligence
and machine learning, computer networks, smart grid communications and
control, networked control systems, and cyber–physical security.
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Texas at Arlington. Downloaded on June 27,2026 at 06:13:01 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
