Air combat autonomous maneuver decision for one-on-one within visual
range engagement base on robust multi-agent reinforcement learning
Weiren KONG, Deyun ZHOU, Kai ZHANG and Zhen YANG
Abstract— Based on a robust multi-agent reinforcement
learning (MARL) algorithm framework, an autonomous ma-
neuver decision-making algorithm for UCAV air combat in one-
on-one combat in the visible range is designed and implemented.
This algorithm can solve the problem that the single agent
reinforcement learning algorithm cannot converge during the
training process due to the unstable environment. At the same
time, considering the shortcomings of the MADDPG algorithm
in a strong competitive environment, it is easy to obtain a very
fragile strategy, which is only targeted at a speciﬁc equilibrium
strategy. In this paper, a minimax module is introduced to
obtain the expected perturbation, which can locally approach
the worst-case perturbation through the gradient. Through
simulation tests of algorithm convergence and policy quality,
the algorithm is found to be effective.
Index Terms— Robust MADDPG, Air combat, Reinforcement
learning, Maneuver strategy
I. INTRODUCTION
With the development of unmanned combat air vehicle
(UCAV) technology in the military ﬁeld, the role and status
of UCAV is also increasing, and the signiﬁcance on the
battleﬁeld is becoming more and more important [1]; UCAV
can fully exploit the performance of aircraft and make large
overload maneuvers that are difﬁcult to make by manned
combat aircraft. Therefore, it is foreseeable that UCAV will
become the protagonist of the future air combat. Due to the
small size of most UCAVs, it is not possible to equip Medium
Range Air-to-air Missile (MRAM). Therefore, aerial combat
within visual range (WVR), referred to as dogﬁght, is likely
to become the main aerial combat scene of UCAV.
The
current
UCAV
can
autonomously
or
semi-
autonomously ﬁnish simple military missions such as
detecting, tracking and combating ground targets. Such as
the RQ-4 "Global Hawk" strategy unmanned reconnaissance
aircraft. However, UCAV is not competent for the WVR
aerial autonomous combat mission with high real-time
requirements.
The UCAV autonomous 1-vs-1 WVR aerial combat ma-
neuver decision refers to the automatic generation of the
maneuvering decision process of 1-vs-1 WVR aerial combat
engagement for the UCAVs[2].
This work was not supported by any organization
Weiren
KONG
is
with
Northwestern
Polytechnical
University,
Xi’an,710072, China weirenkong@qq.com
Deyun
ZHOU
is
with
Northwestern
Polytechnical
University,
Xi’an,710072, China dyzhou@nwpu.edu.cn
Kai
ZHANG
is
with
Northwestern
Polytechnical
University,
Xi’an,710072, China zhangkainpu@mail.nwpu.edu.cn
Zhen
YANG
is
with
Northwestern
Polytechnical
University,
Xi’an,710072, China nwpuyz@foxmail.com
In this paper, the UCAV 1-vs-1 WVR aerial combat task is
modeled as a Zero-sum Markov Games (ZSMG). We deﬁne
an UCAV as an agent. If the environment model is known
and differentiable, it is feasible to solve ZSMG problem
by differential game method. However, UCAV’s precise
dynamic model modeling is very complex, and there are
many non-differentiable modules. In addition, the dynamic
model of enemy UCAV is not available. Therefore, this
paper adopts multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL)
framework to study UCAV policy. MARL is a model-free
learning method, which is suitable for the UCAV 1-vs-1
WVR aerial combat scenario.
Reinforcement learning (RL) has been successfully ap-
plied in various ﬁelds, such as video games, chess and card
games, self-driving cars and so on. However, The UCAV
1-vs-1 WVR aerial combat is a process of environmental
instability for one UCAV, and Markov Decision Process
(MDP) can not be used to model it. To some extent, it makes
no sense for UCAVs to optimize their polices based on this
unstable state of the environment. Policies that are optimized
in the current state may not be valid in the next changed state
of the environment. This leads to the inability to directly
use the experience replay method for training, which is why
the traditional single-agent reinforcement learning algorithm
fails. In addition, the variance of the policy gradient can be
exponentially large when the number of agents increases.
II. RELATED WORK
Various studies on autonomous aerial combat have been
per- formed since early 1960s. Several remarkable works
have been published in literature. At present, many modeling
and solving methods for autonomous decision-making of air
combat maneuvers have been formed, which can be roughly
divided into three categories:
(1) Based on basic ﬁghter maneuvers(BFM) library. In [3],
the ﬁrst systematic study and summary on the establishment
of BFM expert system is proposed. The design of the
maneuver library, the control application and the maneuver
recognition based on the BFM expert system was proposed,
and the various problems in the maneuver decision based
on the action library is elaborated in [4], [5], Based on the
combination of BFM library, target prediction and impact
point’s calculation, an autonomous aerial combat framework
for two-on-two engagements. is proposed [6].
(2) Based on optimization method. In [1], Using Approxi-
mate Dynamic Programming(ADP), a real time autonomous
one-to-one air combat method is studied and the results
2020 IEEE 16th International Conference on Control & Automation (ICCA)
Oct 9-11, 2020 (Virtual) Sapporo, Hokkaido, Japan
978-1-7281-9093-8/20/$31.00 ©2020 IEEE
506
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Texas at Arlington. Downloaded on June 27,2026 at 06:12:17 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

are tested in Real-time indoor autonomous vehicle test en-
vironment (RAVEN) . In [8], Particle swarm optimization,
ant colony optimization and game theory are applied on
a cooperative air combat framework and the results are
compared.
(3) Based on artiﬁcial intelligence method. Using genetic
based machine learning, these algorithms demonstrated the
ability to discover model-free tactics in an air combat en-
vironment [9], [7]. The Q-learning method generates novel
actions with a designed action value function and enables a
successful outmaneuvering of the target [10].
III. PRELIMINARY
A. Zero-sum Markov Games
In this paper, we adopt the two player Zero-sum Markov
Games (ZSMG) theory as a modeling framework for the
UCAV 1-vs-1 WVR aerial combat task. Firstly, the formal
deﬁnition of Markov Games (MG) is brieﬂy introduced.
MG is an extension of Markov Decision Process (MDP),
which uses elements of game theory and allows multiple
agents to compete with each other to model systems that
accomplish their tasks. Formally, an MG over a set of k
agents is deﬁned as [11]:
(1) S: environment states.
(2) A1...Ak: the action spaces of k agents. The action
space of the ith agent is Ai, 1 ⩽i ⩽k.
(3) T : a state transition function which is determined
by the current state and the next action of all agents. If
the environment is stochastic, its function relationship is as
follows:
T : S × S × A1 × ... × Ak →[0, 1]
(1)
(4) R1...Rk: the reward functions of k agents. For the ith
agent (1 ⩽i ⩽k), its function relationship is as follows:
Ri : S × A1 × ... × Ak × S →R
(2)
The goal of ith agent is to ﬁnd a policy πi that maximizes
the discount sum of its rewards Gi.
Gi = Es∼ρπ1,π2...πk ,a∼πi[
T
∑
t=0
γtRt
i]
(3)
Where, ρπ1,π2...πk is a stationary distribution probability for
given k agents polices π1, π2...πk, T is the length of each
trajectory; γ ∈[0, 1] is the discount factor; and Rt
i is reward
of the ith agent at tth step in a trajectory.
ZSMG is a special case of MG. It only considers two
players, called agent and opponent, who have opposite
reward functions and symmetrical utility functions. It can
be formalized as a quintile ⟨S, T , A, O, R⟩. Where, S is a
set of environment states;T is the state transition function,
where T (s, a, o, s′) deﬁnes a transition function from state s
to state s′ when the agent executes action a and the opponent
executes action o in stochastic environment; A and O are
the action spaces of agent and opponent; R is the reward
function of agent and −R is the reward function of opponent.
B. 1-vs-1 WVR aerial combat engagement description
The two players in air 1-vs-1 WVR aerial combat engage-
ment, referred to as blue and red, are assumed to maneuver
in same horizontal plane. The objective of each player is to
reach the tail of the adversary and track stably to satisfy the
launching condition of the missiles or the shooting condition
of the guns.
In the following, 1-vs-1 WVR aerial combat is modeled
by ZSMG. And the control decisions of the each players are
made at same discrete time interval.
1) System state: System state of the air combat is deﬁned
by the positions,speeds, heading and bank angles of a blue
UCAV (denoted by the b subscript) and a red UCAV (denoted
by the r subscript). The system state vector is as follows:
(xb, yb, xr, yr, vb, vr, ϕb, ϕr, ψb, ψr)
(4)
Where, (x, y) are position variables of the UCAV. The
position variables of the aircraft have no limits, thus allowing
for ﬂight at any positions in xy plane. v is speed of the UCAV.
ϕ is the heading angle of UCAV and ψ is the bank angle
of UCAV. The aircraft bank angle is limited based on the
maximum capabilities of the actual UCAV and the desire
to limit the maximum turning capabilities of the aircraft,
the heading variables are allowed to take any value between
±180◦.
2) Continuous action space: In previous studies, seven
basic aircraft maneuvers were often used as a set of
actions[19]. This paper uses a continuous actions space to
control the UCAVs. Since the air combat is studied occurred
in the same horizontal plane, there are two continuous control
variables to control UCAV, which are the thrust acceleration
and the bank angular rate of the UCAV. pitch angular rate
and yaw angular rate are not considered. Therefore, action
space can be noted as:
(ut, u ˙ψ)
(5)
Where, ut is the thrust acceleration of the UCAV and
u ˙ψ is the bank angular rate of the UCAV. They have upper
and lower limits, and their upper and lower limits will vary
depending on the performance of the UCAV. Together they
will affect the performance of the UCAVs acceleration and
turning maneuvers.
3) Rewards: According to the actual air combat scene, the
purpose of blue is to enter the red’s tail attack area, and can
stably lock the opponent, which can enable blue to launch
close-range combat air-to-air missiles to effectively attack
red. In order to describe rewards conveniently, the combat
geometry and parameters shown in Fig. 1 are employed.
In Fig. 1, λb is antenna train angle (ATA) of blue, which is
the angle between LOS vector ρ and the blue’s velocity vb. It
represents the degree of tracking red. ϵb is aspect angle (AA)
of blue, which is the angle between between LOS vector
ρ and red’s velocity vr. It represents the degree of stable
tracking the red. The ATA and AA are allowed to take any
value between ±180◦.
507
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Texas at Arlington. Downloaded on June 27,2026 at 06:12:17 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

Fig. 1. Aircraft relative geometry showing Aspect Angle (AA) and Antenna
Train Angle (ATA)
In this paper, 1-vs-1 WVR aerial combat is regarded as
a ZSMG problem. So, the rewards of both sides should be
opposite to each other. According to the purpose of 1-vs-
1 WVR aerial combat, The reward function is designed as
follows:
Rb = −Rr =



1.0,
|λb(s)| < 30◦∧|ϵb(s)| < 60◦
−1.0,
|λr(s)| < 30◦∧|ϵr(s)| < 60◦
0,
otherwise
(6)
According to the air combat geometry shown in Fig. 1,
the geometric relationship between AA and ATA of the two
UCAVs can be obtained as follows:
|λb(s)| + |ϵr(s)| = 180◦
|λr(s)| + |ϵb(s)| = 180◦
(7)
C. Robust Multi-Agent Deep Deterministic Policy Gradient
1) Deterministic Policy Gradient (DPG) and Deep De-
terministic Policy Gradient (DDPG): DPG algorithm [13]
is improved from Policy Gradient (PG) algorithm . Unlike
PG algorithm, the policy of DPG algorithm is deterministic:
µ : S →A. Since it is a deterministic policy, there is a
policy parameter θ in value function Q(s, a), it is necessary
to derive the value function from policy. The gradient of the
objective J(θ) = Es∼µ[G] should be written as follows:
∇θJ(θ) = Es∼ρµθ [∇θµθ(s)∇aQµ(s, a)|a=µθ(s)]
(8)
In (8), there are no expectations related to actions, so
compared with stochastic policy, policy strategies need less
learning data and have high efﬁciency, especially in the case
of large dimension of action spaces.
DDPG [13] is improved from DPG in which policy and
value function are approximated with deep neural networks.
Similar to the idea of DQN [14] algorithm,to make the train-
ing process more stable and the algorithm more convergent,
experience replay and dual networks structure are introduced.
DDPG is an off-policy algorithm, and samples trajectories
from the experience replay buffer that are stored throughout
training.
2) Multi-Agent
Deep
Deterministic
Policy
Gradient
(MADDPG): In multi-agent environment, for each single
agent, the environment is non-stationary, which violates the
Markov hypothesis. In the case of 1-vs-1 air combat, it
is impossible to determine the state of the enemy UAV
according to the current state and our actor, if only the
action space of our UCAV is used as the action space of
the MDP environment. Particularly, in the multi-agent com-
petitive environment, the problem of non-stationary problem
is particularly serious.
In order to solve the problem of reinforcement learning in
a multi-agent environment, Lowe et al proposed the MAD-
DPG algorithm [15], which applies the DDPG algorithm to a
multi-agent environment. MADDPG algorithm puts forward
the idea of "centralized training, decentralized execution,
which learns a centralized Q function for each agent. MAD-
DPG algorithm can alleviate non-stationary problems and
stabilize training based on global information.
More concretely, the paper takes two-players ZSMG as
an example of multi-agent environment and let µa is the
agent policy and let µo is the opponent policy. Then we
can write the gradient of the expected return for agent and
opponent with polices µa and µo,Ja(θa) = Es∼µa,µo[Ga],
Jo(θo) = Es∼µa,µo[Go] as:
∇θaJa(θa) = Es∼D[∇θµa(s)∇aQµa(s, a, o)|a=µa(s)] (9)
Where, Qµa(s, a, o) is a centralized action-value func-
tion of agent that takes as input agent and opponent, and
Qµo(s, a, o) is a centralized action-value function of oppo-
nent. The experience replay buffer D contains the tuples
(s, s′, a, o, R) recording experiences of agent and opponent,
where s′ denote the next state from s after taking actions
(a, o). The centralized action-value functions are updated
used temporal-difference learning.
3) Robust MADDPG: In MARL, agent’s policy is very
sensitive to other agents’ polices in the same environment.
Particularly in competitive environments, the learned policies
can be easily broken when the opponents change their poli-
cies. In [18], minimax mulit-agent deep deterministic policy
gradient (M3DDPG) algorithm is proposed. For robust multi-
agent reinforcement learning, which leverages the minimax
concept and introduces a minimax learning objective. we can
write the minimax learning objective of agent JMa(θa) as:
JMa(θa) = Es∼µ[Ga]
= min
o
Es∼ρµ[
T
∑
t=0
γtR(st, at, ot)|at=µa(st)]
= Es0∼ρ[min
o
QMa(s0, a0, o0)|a0=µa(s0)]
(10)
Where, in Eq 10, QMa(s, a, o) is minimax Q function.
which is naturally centralized and can be rewritten in a
recursive form:
QMa(s, a, o) =R(s, a, o, s′)+
γEs′[min
o′ QMa(s′, a′, o′)|a′=µa(s′)]
(11)
508
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Texas at Arlington. Downloaded on June 27,2026 at 06:12:17 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

QMa(s, a, o) conditions on the current state s as well as
the current actions a and o and represents the current reward
plus the discounted worst case future return starting from the
next state s′.
Since QMa(s, a, o) is approximated by a deep learning
network, solving min
o
QMa(s, a, o) is very intractable. The
computational cost will be very large by Monte-Carlo simu-
lation. In [1], the paper introduce an efﬁcient and end-to-end
solution, multi-agent adversarial learning (MAAL). MAAL’s
main idea is to treat QMa(s, a, o) as a linearized function,
and then solve the local minimum of QMa(s, a, o) with a
1-step gradient descent. This idea is similar to adversarial
training technique originally developed for supervised learn-
ing. Apply adversarial training technique to Eq. (11) and
eventually derive the gradient of JMa(θa):
∇θaJa(θa) = Es∼D


∇θµa(s)∇aQµa(s, a, o∗)|
a = µa(s)
o∗= o + bϵ
bϵ = −α∇oQµa(s, a, o)


(12)
Where, bϵ is the desired perturbation which can be locally
approximated by the gradient direction at Qµa(s, a, o) to the
worst case perturbation by taking a small gradient step. α
is a tunable coefﬁcient representing the perturbation rate.
Robust MADDPG only requires one additional gradient
computation, and can be executed in a fully end-to-end
fashion.
IV. POTENTIAL-BASED REWARD SHAPING
Deep reinforcement learning(DRL) has always restricted
practical applications due to the long training time and com-
putational power requirements of the agents. For example,
AlphaZero trains a good result, requires a lot of computing
power, and trains for 3 days. So shortening the training turn-
around time has been an important issue.
For the 1-vs-1 WVR aerial combat, it is very difﬁ-
cult to train the policy of actual combat performance di-
rectly.Therefore, this paper proposes reward shaping to ac-
celerate training, so that the training turn-around time is
accelerated.
Shaping reward is a reward for designers’ rewards for
nature’s gains from the environment. Rewards provide a
visual representation of domain knowledge, especially for de-
signers who may have designed environmental rewards[16].
In addition, reward shaping does not require modiﬁcation of
the agent or environment, making implementation relatively
simple.
However, if the design of shaping reward is not appropri-
ate, it may slow down the convergence time of the training
algorithm, or it may change the optimal strategy. Even the
converged policy will never reach the goal[16].
Potential-based reward shaping (PBRS) was proposed to
ensure such problems that mentioned above do not occur[17].
The shaping reward Rrs given in this approach is the
difference of a potential function Φ deﬁned over a source
state s and a destination state s′:
Rrs = R + γΦ(s) −Φ(s′)
(13)
Where R is the original reward from the environment and
γ is the same discount factor in Eq. 11.
Potential-based reward shaping has been proven to not
alter the Nash equilibria of the multi-agent system, but
potential-based reward shaping affects the exploration of
the shaped agent. Therefore, it can change the joint policy
converged upon as even just one agents modiﬁed exploration
can sufﬁciently redirect the search of joint policy space to
converge to a different point of equilibrium. Therefore, I
need to combine prior knowledge of air combat to design
a shaping reward that allows both UCAVs to converge to a
better Nash equilibrium policies.
A. Reward Shaping for Orientation
According to the actual air combat scene, the purpose of
both UCAVs is to enter the opponent’s tail attack area, and
can stably lock the opponent, which can enable UCAV to
launch close-range combat air-to-air missiles to effectively
attack the enemy UCAV. For this purpose, make the antenna
train angle λ and aspect angle ϵ of the UCAV as small as
possible. Design shaping reward of orientation as follows:
Φo(s) = 180◦−(|λb(s)| + |ϵb(s)|)
180◦
(14)
The range of Φo(s) is [−1, 1]. λb(s) and ϵb(s) can be
calculated from the current system state s, and its calculation
formula is as follows:
|λb(s)| = |ϕb −τb(s)|
|ϵb(s)| = |ϕr −τb(s)|
τb(s) = tan−1
( yr −yb
xr −xb
)
(15)
B. Reward Shaping for Distance
In the air combat process, both the missile and the cannon
have corresponding attack distances, including the maximum
attack distance, the minimum attack distance, the inescapable
distance and so on. So a shaping reward for distanced needs
to be designed to make UCAV tend to the desired distance
De. Design shaping reward for distanced as follows:
Φd(s) = Φo(s) exp−kd|De−D(s)|
(16)
Where, D(s) =
√
(xr −xb)2 + (yr −yb)2 is the distance
between two UCAVs and kd is a coefﬁcient. The range
of Φd(s) is [−1, 1]. The shaping reward for distance can
effectively adjust the distance of two UCAVs according to
the current air combat situation. For example, if the blue is
in the defensive position, then it need to increase the distance
as much as possible to get rid of red; if the blue is in the
offensive position, then it need to make the distance as close
as possible to the desired distance.
509
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Texas at Arlington. Downloaded on June 27,2026 at 06:12:17 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

C. Reward Shaping for Velocity
The expected velocity of UAV is determined by the current
air combat situation. For example, when blue is in the
offensive situation, the expected velocity of blue is the same
as that of red, so as to prevent overshooting caused by too
fast velocity or prevent be easily thrown away by red caused
by too low velocity. On the contrary, when the blue is in the
defensive situation, the blue expects the velocity is difference
from the velocity of red, so that it is convenient to reverse
the defensive situation through velocity advantage as the
offensive situation. Design shaping reward for velocity as
follows:
Φv(s) = Φo(s) exp−kv|vb−vr|
(17)
Where, kv is a coefﬁcient. The range of Φv(s) is [−1, 1].
D. Combined Shaping Reward
The shaping reward components, Eq. (14), Eq. (16) and
Eq. (17), are combined to obtain the resultant shaping
reward:
Φ(s) = Φo(s) + Φd(s) + Φv(s)
(18)
V. ALGORITHM FRAMEWORK
In this section, I will elaborate on the training algo-
rithm for one-on-one WVR engagements. The proposed is
an extension of Robust MADDPG algorithm. The overall
framework of training algorithm is shown in Fig. 2.
Fig. 2.
The overall framework of training algorithm for robust MADDPG
Training process for one-on-one within visual range air combat engagement
The algorithm framework consists of two parts: air combat
environment model and robust Multi-Agent Reinforcement
Learning. Air combat simulation environment model will be
explained in detail in the chapter of experiment and analysis.
For the part of robust Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learn-
ing, Each UCAV has its own actor and critic. Similar to
MADDPG algorithm, there are evaluate network and target
network in actor and critical, and replay buffer to ensure
the stability of training algorithm. Different from MADDPG
algorithm, there is a "minimax" module, which is used to
solve bϵ which is the desired perturbation which can be locally
approximated by the gradient direction at Qµa(s, a, o) to the
worst case perturbation by taking a small gradient step. The
Robust MADDPG Training process for one-on-one within
visual range air combat engagement is shown in Algorithm
1.
VI. EXPERIMENT AND ANALYSIS
A. Air Combat Simulation Environment
Air combat simulation environment model includes 2-
DOF kinematic and dynamics models of two UCAVs. In
the inertial coordinate system, the equation of kinematic and
dynamics of the UCAV is shown as Eq. (20).











˙x = v cos ψ
˙y = v sin ψ
˙v = ut
m
˙φ = u ˙φ
˙ψ = g tan φ
v
(20)
Where, m is the mass of UCAV, g = 9.81.
In this paper, we use Python 3 language to coding the
program of simulation environment, which can use script to
deﬁne the initial states, maximum episode length and other
parameters. At the same time, the simulation environment
can record the state data of two UCAVs in real time. The
visualization interface is shown in Fig. 3.
Fig. 3.
The visualization interface of air combat simulation environment
B. Algorithm Parameters
The robust MADDPG algorithm is built by TensorFlow
module. Both Actor and Critic use a fully connected network,
The Actor network and Critic network both consists of two
hidden layers with 300 and 300 units respectively and the
activation function is tanh function. The learning rate for
optimizer is 10−3. Model is trained by a random sampling
strategy with batch sizes of 64, the maximum eposide length
is 15,and the replay buffer size is 10000. The OU process
is used to add noise to the action value to increase the
exploration of the action space. Initial state parameters are
shown in Table I. It should be mentioned that in order to
prevent two UCAVs from "biting each other’s tail" in air
combat due to the same performance, two UCAVs are set to
have different minimum turning radius. Among them, blue
UCAV is better than red UCAV.
510
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Texas at Arlington. Downloaded on June 27,2026 at 06:12:17 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

Algorithm 1 Robust MADDPG Training process for one-on-one within visual range air combat engagement
1: for episode = 1 to M do
2:
Initialize a random process N for action exploration, and receive two UCAV initial state information s0;
3:
for t = 1 to max-episode-length do do
4:
For blue UCAV, select action a = µa(s) + Nt and for red UCAV, select action o = µo(s) + Nt w.r.t. the current
policy and exploration;
5:
Execute actions a and o and observe reward R and new state information; s′;
6:
Get Rrs using reward shaping(R, s, s′);
7:
Store (s, (a, o), Rrs, s′) in replay buffer D, and set s ←s′;
8:
for agent i ∈[UCAVa, UCAVo] do
9:
Sample a random minibatch of S samples (sk, (ak, ok), Rk
rs, s′k)from D;
10:
Set yk = Rk
rs + γQMi(s′, i′, o′)|i′=µi(sk),o′=µo(sk)+bϵ with bϵ deﬁned in Eq. (12);
11:
Update critic by minimizing the loss L(θi) = 1
S
∑
k(yk −QMi(s′, i′, o′))2;
12:
Update actor using the sampled policy gradient with bϵ deﬁned in Eq. (12):
∇θiJi(θi) = 1
S
∑
k
∇θiµi(sk)∇iQµi
Mi(s, i, o∗)
(19)
13:
end for
14:
Update target network parameters for each agent i: θ′
i ←τθi + (1 −τ)θ′
i;
15:
end for
16: end for
TABLE I
THE INITIAL STATE OF TRAINING PROCESS
Parameter
Blue UCAV
Red UCAV
x
0
[-2000,2000] randomly
y
0
[-2000,2000] randomly
v
200
[100,300] randomly
ψ
0
0
φ
0
0
C. Convergence of Training Process
Using the above parameters, we use MADDPG algorithm
and robust MADDPG algorithm to learn air combat maneu-
ver strategy for one-on-one within visual range engagement.
I use the average reward obtained by blue UCAV in each
episode as a quantitative indicator to measure the air combat
situation advantage of blue UCAV in this episode. As the
reward is 0,1 or -1, the average reward in each episode is
equivalent to advantage steps ratio. The convergence pro-
cesses of the average reward of blue UAV are demonstrated
in Fig. 4.
It can be seen from Fig. 4 that during the whole train-
ing process, the average reward of MADDPG and Robust
MADDPG converge to higher results (the best value is
1). However, the convergence curve of robust MADDPG
algorithm is better than that of MADDPG algorithm in the
whole training process.
D. Evaluate the Quality of Learned Air Combat Maneuver
Strategy
To evaluate the quality of learned air combat maneuver
strategy trained by robust MADDPG, we measure the per-
formance of strategies by MADDPG, robust MADDPG and
Approximate Dynamic Programming(ADP), Among them,
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
Episode
106
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
Mean reward in episode (Advantage steps ratio)
Robust MADDPG
MADDPG
Fig. 4.
The convergence processes of the average reward of blue UAV
using MADDPG and robust MADDPG
the strategy of hostile UAV in ADP adopts the maximum
maneuver turn right.
The results are demonstrated in Fig. 5. It can be seen
from the ﬁgure that the air combat strategy obtained by
using robust MADDPG algorithm has a slight advantage
(the winning rate is about 60% in the strategy obtained by
MADDPG. The air combat strategy of ADP algorithm is the
worst of the three strategies.
VII. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORKS
A. Conclusions
Using the robust MADDPG algorithm framework, a ro-
bust Multi-Agent reinforcement learning algorithm for au-
511
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Texas at Arlington. Downloaded on June 27,2026 at 06:12:17 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

Robust MA vs MA
Robust vs ADP
MA vs ADP
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
Win ratio
Fig. 5.
Comparison between Robust MADDPG (Robust MADDPG),
MADDPG (MA) and ADP on rate of winning of air combat
tonomous maneuver decision of UCAV in air combat of
one-on-one within visual range engagements is designed and
implemented. This algorithm can prevent the training process
from not converging due to the unstable environment when
using the single agent reinforcement learning algorithm. At
the same time, considering the disadvantage of MADDPG
algorithm in the competitive environment, it is easy to get a
very fragile strategy which only aims at a certain equilibrium
strategy, this paper introduces a minimax module to get the
desired perturbation which can be locally approximated by
the gradient direction to the worst case perturbation by taking
a small gradient step. Through the simulation test of the
convergence and the quality of the strategy, it is found that
the algorithm is effective.
B. Future Works
This algorithm is only limited to ofﬂine learning, and does
not continue to learn in the use of strategies. This will be a
very big limitation. My future work will focus on the use of
"lifelong learning" and other mechanisms, so that UAVs can
carry out distributed online learning.
VIII. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Thanks to Professor ZHOU, my supervisor, for his guid-
ance on algorithm ideas, and Kai ZHANG for debugging and
modifying my simulation program.
REFERENCES
[1] McGrew J S, How J P, Williams B, et al. Air-combat strategy using
approximate dynamic programming[J]. Journal of guidance, control,
and dynamics, 2010, 33(5): 1641-1654.
[2] Fu L, Liu J, Meng G, et al. Survey of manned/unmanned air com-
bat decision technology[C]//The 27th Chinese Control and Decision
Conference (2015 CCDC). IEEE, 2015: 353-357.
[3] Gongzhang Z Y L J S. Recognition method for tactical maneuver of
target in autonomous close-in air combat [J][J]. Journal of Beijing
University of Aeronautics and Astronautics, 2007, 9.
[4] Shin H, Lee J, Kim H, et al. An autonomous aerial combat framework
for two-on-two engagements based on basic ﬁghter maneuvers[J].
Aerospace Science and Technology, 2018, 72: 305-315.
[5] Duan H, Wei X, Dong Z. Multiple UCAVs cooperative air combat
simulation platform based on PSO, ACO, and game theory[J]. IEEE
Aerospace and Electronic Systems Magazine, 2013, 28(11): 12-19.
[6] Smith R E, Dike B A, Mehra R K, et al. Classiﬁer systems in combat:
two-sided learning of maneuvers for advanced ﬁghter aircraft[J].
Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering, 2000,
186(2-4): 421-437.
[7] Ernest N, Car D, Schumacher C, et al. Genetic fuzzy based artiﬁcial
intelligence for unmanned combat aerial vehicle control in simulated
air combat missions[J]. Journal of Defense Management, 2016, 6(1):
2167-0374.1000144.
[8] Duan H, Li P, Yu Y. A predator-prey particle swarm optimization
approach to multiple UCAV air combat modeled by dynamic game
theory[J]. IEEE/CAA Journal of Automatica Sinica, 2015, 2(1): 11-
18.
[9] Luo D L, Shen C L, Wang B, et al. Air combat decision-making
for cooperative multiple target attack using heuristic adaptive genetic
algorithm[C]//2005 International Conference on Machine Learning
and Cybernetics. IEEE, 2005, 1: 473-478.
[10] Liu P, Ma Y. A deep reinforcement learning based intelligent deci-
sion method for UCAV air combat[C]//Asian Simulation Conference.
Springer, Singapore, 2017: 274-286.
[11] Altman E. Flow control using the theory of zero sum Markov games[J].
IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control, 1994, 39(4): 814-818.
[12] Lillicrap T P, Hunt J J, Pritzel A, et al. Continuous control with deep
reinforcement learning[J]. arXiv preprint arXiv:1509.02971, 2015.
[13] Silver D, Lever G, Heess N, et al. Deterministic policy gradient
algorithms[C]. 2014.
[14] Mnih V, Kavukcuoglu K, Silver D, et al. Playing atari with deep
reinforcement learning[J]. arXiv preprint arXiv:1312.5602, 2013.
[15] Lowe R, Wu Y, Tamar A, et al. Multi-agent actor-critic for mixed
cooperative-competitive environments[C]//Advances in neural infor-
mation processing systems. 2017: 6379-6390.
[16] Ng A Y, Harada D, Russell S. Policy invariance under reward
transformations: Theory and application to reward shaping[C]//ICML.
1999, 99: 278-287.
[17] Devlin S, Kudenko D. Theoretical considerations of potential-based
reward shaping for multi-agent systems[C]//The 10th International
Conference on Autonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems-Volume
1. International Foundation for Autonomous Agents and Multiagent
Systems, 2011: 225-232.
[18] Li S, Wu Y, Cui X, et al. Robust multi-agent reinforcement learning
via minimax deep deterministic policy gradient[C]//Proceedings of the
AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence. 2019, 33: 4213-4220.
[19] Austin F, Carbone G, Falco M, et al. Automated maneuvering de-
cisions for air-to-air combat[C]//Guidance, navigation and control
conference. 1987: 2393.
512
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Texas at Arlington. Downloaded on June 27,2026 at 06:12:17 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
