Towards Robust Autonomous Cyber Defence Agents
using Hybrid AI models
Laurin Holz1, Johannes Loevenich1, Roberto Rigolin F. Lopes1
1Secure Communications & Information (SIX), Thales Deutschland, Ditzingen, Germany
Email: {laurin.holz, johannes.loevenich, roberto.rigolin}@thalesgroup.com
Abstract—Recent developments in Software-Defined Defence
(SDD) provide the interfaces for multi-layer monitoring and
control to realise Autonomous Cyber Defence (ACD) in critical
network infrastructure used by the military. As a result,
autonomous
agents
can
enforce
cybersecurity
measures
at
different layers (link, IP, transport and application) using
hybrid Artificial Intelligence (AI) models. For example, Multi-
Agent Reinforcement Learning (MARL) can be combined with
symbolic AI (knowledge graphs) and augmented/fine-tuned Large
Language Models (LLMs) to detect, predict, protect, respond
and recover from cyberattacks. This thesis starts from the
hypothesis that the robustness of ACD agents can be formally
verified, ensuring their safe development in mission critical
environments. By applying Formal Verification (FV) techniques
to MARL systems, the aim is to provide mathematically grounded
guarantees such as correctness, safety, and adversarial resilience,
thereby enabling trustworthy autonomous decision-making in
SDD-enabled infrastructures.
Index Terms—Software-Defined Defence, Autonomous Cyber
Defence, Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning, Cyber Security
I. INTRODUCTION
Recent research has introduced Autonomous Cyber Defence
(ACD) systems using hybrid Artificial Intelligence (AI)
models that combine rule-based systems, Deep Reinforcement
Learning (DRL), Deep Learning (DL) and generative AI
models [1]–[4]. The motivation for this thesis comes from
the availability of well-defined interfaces for monitoring and
controlling multilayer systems implementing the Software-
Defined Defence (SDD) paradigm. However, there is limited
research assessing the robustness and security of these agents
that implement defensive tactics using a well-defined set
of actions (detect, predict, protect, respond, and recover).
Therefore, this thesis plans to design and evaluate a set of
Formal Verification (FV) methods to quantify and improve the
robustness of hybrid AI solutions for cybersecurity in critical
network infrastructures.
For example, ACD environments [5]–[7] are instrumented to
train and test Multi Agent Reinforcement Learning (MARL)
with two or more agents collaborating to defend user hosts
and operational servers. These environments simulate complex
and realistic conditions that require the coordination of
multiple agents to effectively detect, mitigate and neutralise
cyber threats. However, the use of MARL in cybersecurity
presents critical challenges, particularly due to the non-
transparent and stochastic nature of the learned policies. In
critical environments, such as military networks, this lack of
transparency can hinder trust and deployment.
To address this, the focus of this thesis is the FV of
MARL systems for ACD. FV, traditionally used to prove
the correctness of software and hardware systems, is now
being adapted to reason about the behaviour of learning-
based systems. This thesis aims to apply FV techniques to
evaluate and ensure key properties of MARL agents such as
safety, consistency and robustness in adversarial and uncertain
network environments.
In addition, this work proposes the integration of pre-trained
Large Language Models (LLMs) augmented to support human-
machine interaction throughout the verification process. Formal
outputs – such as temporal logic formulas, counterexamples, or
violated properties – can be translated by LLMs into natural
language explanations. This translation enables operators to
better understand the verification results and supports a human-
in-the-loop verification process. Ultimately, the goal is to
improve the trustworthiness and reliability of AI-driven ACD
systems through a combination of FV techniques and an
accessible interface for cybersecurity experts.
II. STATE OF THE ART
This section reviews recent investigations focused on the
development of ACD agents, with particular focus on the use
of MARL and FV techniques. The work reviewed includes
both general applications of FV and approaches specifically
aimed at the verification of MARL agents. Table I provides a
comparative overview of the reviewed works, categorising each
approach according to whether it is applied in a cybersecurity
context, whether it uses hybrid AI methods, incorporates
MARL, uses FV, and whether it includes a user interface,
thereby elaborating the research gap addressed by the approach
proposed in this thesis.
Recent investigation has introduced ACD agents using DRL
models trained and tested in gym environments [4], [5], [8]. For
example, the study in [8] proposes a Reinforcement Learning
(RL) model to compute an optimal defensive strategy for the
single blue agent. The approach uses causal graphs to capture
how actions influence the environment, combined with a search
tree to predict and evaluate the agent’s subsequent actions. This
method ensures the intrinsic explicability of the agent, and also
provides mathematical proofs of the optimality of the strategy
269
2025 IEEE 11th International Conference on Network Softwarization (NetSoft) | 979-8-3315-4345-7/25/$31.00 ©2025 IEEE | DOI: 10.1109/NETSOFT64993.2025.11080605
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Texas at Arlington. Downloaded on June 27,2026 at 06:31:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

TABLE I: Overview and Comparative Analysis of Related Work
Reference
Cybersecurity
Hybrid AI
MARL
Formal Verification
User Interface
Hammar et al. 2024 [8]
Yes
No
No
Implicit
No
Loevenich et al. 2025 [4]
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Gourlet et al. 2024 [6]
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Farias et al. 2024 [9]
No
No
No
Yes
No
Tihanyi et al. 2024 [10]
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
Dreossi et al. 2019 [11]
No
No
No
Yes
No
Wang et al. 2021 [12]
No
No
Yes
Yes
No
Zhou et al. 2023 [13]
No
No
Yes
Yes
No
Hammond et al. 2021 [14]
No
No
Yes
Yes
No
Ours
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
and the convergence of the proposed algorithm. A hybrid
ACD solution is presented in [4], combining DRL, rule-based
systems and augmented LLMs. While FV is not explicitly
addressed, the integration of LLMs enables the generation of
human-readable explanations of agent behaviours and system
states, significantly improving interpretability.
The investigation in [6] extends this line of research
by focusing on MARL within the proposed Building a
Reproducible and Efficient Training AI Gym for Network
Environments (BRETAGNE) environment. The study investi-
gates the coordinated behaviour of multiple defender agents
working together against dynamic threats. Although FV is
not covered in this context, the use of LLM plays a key
role in increasing the transparency of agent decision making.
By combining MARL and LLMs, the approach aims to both
improve the scalability of ACD systems and assist human
experts in interpreting the actions.
FV has long been a key component in software correctness
assurance, particularly through techniques such as Bounded
Model Checking (BMC). [9] introduced the Efficient SMT-
based Bounded Model Checker (ESBMC)-Python, a BMC-
based verifier specifically tailored for Python programs. This
tool translates Python code into an intermediate representation
suitable
for
Satisfiability
Modulo
Theories (SMT)-based
analysis, allowing it to detect runtime errors and logical
inconsistencies.
Building on this foundation, [10] proposed a framework
that combines BMC with LLMs to develop self-healing
software. Their framework, ESBMC-AI, uses BMC to discover
vulnerabilities and generate counterexamples, which are then
passed to a LLM for automated repair suggestions. These
repairs are then re-verified, creating a feedback loop that
improves the robustness and security of the software.
The scope of FV is expanding to include AI-based systems,
in particular those incorporating neural networks. In this
context, [11] has developed Verify AI (VERIFAI), a toolkit for
the formal analysis of AI-driven systems. VERIFAI focuses on
verifying system-level properties by exploring structured input
spaces and monitoring the behaviour of neural networks under
uncertainty.
In the context of MARL, FV remains a significantly under-
explored area, with only a limited number of approaches
available to address the unique challenges posed by multi-
agent systems. One notable contribution in this domain is
the work by [12], who proposed a novel reachability analysis
framework specifically tailored for MARL. Their approach
formulates the reachability problem in MARL as a Mixed
Integer Linear Program (MILP), enabling the verification of
state specifications in multi-agent environments.
The investigation reported in [13] focused on the robustness
properties
of
a
trained
MARL
system
to
adjust
the
trustworthiness of the model against unexpected perturbations
in
the
input
space.
The
framework
called
Robustness
Testing for Critical Agents (RTCA) employs a Differential
Evolution (DE)-based selection of critical agents in the
system whose state perturbations would adversely affect the
team’s performance. Secondly, RTCA uses a team cooperation
policy evaluation method as the objective function for DE
optimisation.
The investigation in [14] explored the verification of
temporal logic specifications in MARL ensuring that the
learned policies adhere to the desired temporal behaviours.
The proposed Automaton/Logic Multi-Agent Natural Actor-
Critic (ALMANAC) framework is accompanied by rigorous
correctness and convergence guarantees. This ensures that the
learned policies are both reliable and efficient. The experiments
presented demonstrate the ability of the algorithm to guide
MARL to satisfy complex temporal objectives in environments
with probabilistic behaviours.
While various approaches have explored the use of MARL
and LLMs in the cybersecurity context, the integration of
FV into these models remains underexplored. FV are well
established in traditional software verification and have seen
growing application to AI components such as neural networks.
However, their use in the context of MARL remains limited.
This work addresses this gap by proposing a framework that
brings together FV, MARL and LLMs to enable both robust
agent behaviour and improved interpretability in complex
cyber environments.
III. PROBLEM & HYPOTHESIS
This thesis aims to support the design, training and
evaluation of robust and secure ACD agents for critical military
network infrastructure by introducing a framework that enables
270
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Texas at Arlington. Downloaded on June 27,2026 at 06:31:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

FV for MARL with a human interface using augmented/fine-
tuned LLMs.
A. Problem Definition
ACD agents deployed in network segments hosting SDD
solutions must operate under conditions of high uncertainty
and partial observability. Each agent typically has access only
to partial, local, or noisy information about the global state of
the network, making real-time decision-making both difficult
and error-prone. In such environments, agents must detect
and mitigate evolving cyber threats through adaptive decision-
making, even when faced with incomplete or uncertain data.
These challenges are further compounded in multi-agent
settings, where each agent must not only act autonomously
based on its limited view, but also communicate with others
to establish a collective defence. This requires effective
information sharing and joint decision-making mechanisms to
handle uncertainty and ensure aligned and robust defensive
actions.
To capture these challenges, the Partially Observable
Markov
Decision
Process
(POMDP)
framework
mod-
els
the
decision-making
process
as
a
7-tuple
M
=
(S, A, T , R, Ω, O, γ), where:
• State Space S: Represents the current state of the
Protected Core Network, including the topology, active
hosts, system vulnerabilities, and compromise levels of
nodes.
• Action Space A: The set of defensive actions available to
a blue agent, such as scanning for threats, blocking traffic,
restoring systems, or deploying decoy services.
• Transition Function T : Defines how the network state
changes based on actions taken by defenders and
adversarial behaviours.
• Reward Function R : S × A −→R: Blue agents are
assigned penalties when users are unable to perform their
tasks, users access a compromised service or adversaries
deny the operational service.
• Observation Space Ω: A subset of the state space
representing the information an agent can perceive. It
captures the agent’s local view of the environment and
is enriched by messages from other agents to support
communication and mitigate partial observability.
• Observation Function O : S × A −→Ω: A mapping from
the true global state to an agent-specific observation.
• Discount Factor γ
∈[0, 1): Determines the balance
between immediate and long-term security objectives.
In this model, each agent selects an action based on its
partial observation, which induces a state transition and leads
to rewards that reflect the effect of its actions. The objective
for each agent is to maximise the expected cumulative reward,
while handling the challenges posed by partial observability,
uncertainty, and the need for multi-agent information sharing.
By framing the problem as a POMDP, this research explores
how agents can make robust decisions amidst uncertainty
and adapt to defend against evolving cyber threats. This
Violated Property +
Counterexample
MARL Agent
Model Training
Environment
Trust in the System
Robust & Secure
MARL Agent
FV Report
Formal Properties
Start
Reachability Analysis
Model Checking
Fuzzy Testing
Temporal Logic
Theorem Proving 
Abstract Interpretation
Failed
Output
A
B
Is verified?
Yes
End
Input
Expert
Database
LLM
C
Suggestion
Fig. 1: Thesis methodology: model training (A), formal
verification (B), and reporting (C).
approach lays the foundation for FV and LLM-based interfaces
to improve interpretability and reliability of MARL models
within ACD agents for SDD-enabled infrastructures.
B. Hypothesis
This thesis hypothesises that applying FV techniques
to MARL systems in ACD environments can significantly
improve
their
robustness,
security,
and
trustworthiness.
Furthermore, by integrating a human-in-the-loop interface
powered by fine-tuned LLMs, it will be possible to translate
FV results into interpretable, human-readable insights. This
will support more effective oversight, debugging, and trust in
the deployment of MARL-based ACD agents, in high-stakes,
mission-critical settings such as SDD infrastructures.
IV. METHODOLOGY
The methodology for this thesis is divided into three key
phases, as illustrated in Fig. 1. In the first phase (A), MARL
agents are trained in simulated Automated Cyber Operation
(ACO) gym environments. The training phase implements
a curriculum learning approach, as proposed in [15], and
incorporates a set of training strategies such as Centralized
Training with Decentralized Execution (CTDE), Independent
Learning, Centralized Training with Centralized Execution
(CTCE), and evaluates the effect of hierarchical MARL.
Throughout this phase, the agents will be evaluated in terms
of their performance, adaptability and robustness against cyber
threats. These empirical evaluations will serve as the basis for
the subsequent FV phase.
In the second phase (B), the trained MARL agent, along with
its operational environment and the properties to be verified, is
passed into the proposed verification framework in Fig. 1. This
framework integrates a set of verification techniques to ensure
the agent’s behaviour aligns with specified robustness and
271
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Texas at Arlington. Downloaded on June 27,2026 at 06:31:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

safety criteria. Reachability analysis is applied to determine
whether the agents can access unsafe or undesired states
under any circumstance, ensuring that their policy respects
operational boundaries even in the presence of environmental
variability. Model checking is used to verify whether temporal
logic specifications, such as safety and liveness, hold across
all
possible
execution
paths.
Complementing
this,
fuzz
testing introduces unexpected or adversarial inputs into the
agent’s environment, allowing for the empirical assessment
of its fault tolerance and resilience against manipulation.
Temporal logic, particularly variants of Linear Temporal
Logic (LTL) and Computational Tree Logic (CTL), enables
the formalization and analysis of time-sensitive behaviours,
capturing the sequential dependencies. Theorem proving
is employed to derive rigorous, mathematically grounded
correctness guarantees. By constructing formal proofs within a
logical framework, this technique ensures that key safety and
robustness properties hold. Abstract interpretation, as a form
of static analysis, is employed to reason about the agent’s
behaviour at a higher level of abstraction, allowing for the
generalization of verification results across broader state spaces
and the detection of policy anomalies.
In cases where the verification process fails, a counterexam-
ple is generated for the violated property. This counterexample
is then processed by a LLM-based diagnostic interface,
which interprets the failure in natural language and suggests
corrective actions. This output feeds into a human-in-the-loop
process in which experts can decide whether to adjust the
agent’s policy through retraining, modify the environment, or
refine the formal specifications. If the verification is successful,
the output of this phase is a formally verified, robust and
secure MARL agent, accompanied by a detailed FV report
documenting the verified properties and results.
The third phase involves the integration of the verified
agent and its FV report into a human-machine interface
(C). This interface allows human operators to interact with
the report, ask questions and explore the verification results
in depth. By facilitating transparent access to the agent’s
behavioural guarantees and verification history, this interactive
system enhances interpretability and fosters trust in the agent’s
decision-making processes. Through this final phase, the
methodology supports not only technical robustness, but also
human confidence in the deployment of MARL agents in
safety-critical environments.
V. OUTLOOK
In the coming month, this thesis will implement the
described FV methods to improve the CTDE training process
in
a
simulated/emulated
environment
(Cyber
Operations
Research Gym (CybORG)/BRETAGNE) for MARL to defend
critical military network infrastructure. The main hypothesis
of this thesis is that FV techniques for MARL, prioritising
approaches that deal with partial observability in cybersecurity
contexts, will help to improve both the design of the
simulated/emulated environment and the optimisation/finding
of optimal cyber defence measures. The main idea is to
make the main results of the FV (e.g. correctness proofs,
counterexamples, coverage metrics, etc.) available to a LLM
agent that can be used to optimise the experiments performed
in the simulated/emulated environment and to automatically
adapt the training process to improve the agent’s performance,
especially for military network requirements. In particular, in
the first year of this thesis, the results will be used to refine the
methodology to provide a solid foundation for the subsequent
development of the full verification framework.
REFERENCES
[1] J. F. Loevenich, E. Adler, A. B´ecue, A. Velazquez, K. Wrona,
V. Boshnakov, J. Falkcrona, N. Nordbotten, O. L. Worthington,
J. R¨oning, R. Rigolin, and F. Lopes, “Training autonomous cyber defense
agents: Challenges & opportunities in military networks,” in MILCOM
2024 - 2024 IEEE Military Communications Conference (MILCOM),
2024, pp. 158–163.
[2] J. F. Loevenich, E. Adler, R. Mercier, A. Velazquez, and R. R. F. Lopes,
“Design of an Autonomous Cyber Defence Agent using Hybrid AI
models,” in 2024 International Conference on Military Communication
and Information Systems (ICMCIS), Koblenz, Germany, 2024, pp. 1–10.
[3] J. F. Loevenich, T. H¨urten, F. Spelter, E. Adler, J. Braun, L. Moxon,
Y. Gourlet, T. Lefeuvre, and R. R. F. Lopes, “Towards robust and secure
autonomous cyber defense agents in coalition networks,” in MILCOM
2024 - 2024 IEEE Military Communications Conference (MILCOM),
2024, pp. 152–157.
[4] J. Loevenich, E. Adler, T. H¨urten, and R. R. F. Lopes, “Design and
evaluation of an Autonomous Cyber Defence agent using DRL and an
augmented LLM,” Computer Networks, vol. 262, p. 111162, 2025.
[5] M. Standen, D. Bowman, S. Hoang, T. Richer, M. Lucas, R. V. Tassel,
P. Vu, M. Kiely, K. C., N. Konschnik, and J. Collyer. (2022) CybORG:
Cyber Operations Research Gym. Available: https://github.com/cage-
challenge/CybORG. [Accessed: 08 April 2025].
[6] Y. Gourlet, T. Lefeuvre, J. F. Loevenich, T. H¨urten, F. Spelter,
E. Adler, J. Braun, L. Moxon, and R. R. F. Lopes, “BRETAGNE:
Building a Reproducible and Efficient Training AI Gym for Network
Environments,” in MILCOM 2024 - IEEE Military Communications
Conference (MILCOM), 2024, pp. 164–169.
[7] K. Hammar, “Optimal Security Response to Network Intrusions in IT
Systems,” arXiv, pp. 1–346, 2025.
[8] K. Hammar, N. Dhir, and R. Stadler, “Optimal Defender Strategies for
CAGE-2 using Causal Modeling and Tree Search,” arXiv, pp. 1–17,
2024.
[9] B. Farias, R. Menezes, E. B. de Lima Filho, Y. Sun, and L. C. Cordeiro,
“Esbmc-python: A bounded model checker for python programs,” in
Proceedings of the 33rd ACM SIGSOFT International Symposium on
Software Testing and Analysis, ser. ISSTA 2024.
New York, NY, USA:
Association for Computing Machinery, 2024, p. 1836–1840.
[10] N. Tihanyi, R. Jain, Y. Charalambous, M. A. Ferrag, Y. Sun, and L. C.
Cordeiro, “A new era in software security: Towards self-healing software
via large language models and formal verification,” arXiv, pp. 1–12,
2024.
[11] T. Dreossi, D. J. Fremont, S. Ghosh, E. Kim, H. Ravanbakhsh,
M. Vazquez-Chanlatte, and S. A. Seshia, “Verifai: A toolkit for the design
and analysis of artificial intelligence-based systems,” pp. 1–10, 2019.
[12] X. Wang, J. Peng, S. Li, and B. Li, “Formal Reachability Analysis for
Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning Systems,” IEEE Access, vol. 9, pp.
45 812–45 821, 2021.
[13] Z. Zhou and G. Liu, Robustness Testing for Multi-Agent Reinforcement
Learning: State Perturbations on Critical Agents.
IOS Press, 2023, pp.
3131 – 3139.
[14] L. Hammond, A. Abate, J. Gutierrez, and M. Wooldridge, “Multi-Agent
Reinforcement Learning with Temporal Logic Specifications,” arXiv, pp.
1–25, 2021.
[15] T. H¨urten, J. F. Loevenich, F. Spelter, E. Adler, J. Braun, L. Moxon,
Y. Gourlet, T. Lefeuvre, and R. R. F. Lopes, “Hierarchical Multi-Agent
Reinforcement Learning for Autonomous Cyber Defense in Coalition
Networks,” in MILCOM 2024 - 2024 IEEE Military Communications
Conference (MILCOM), 2024, pp. 176–181.
272
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Texas at Arlington. Downloaded on June 27,2026 at 06:31:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
