Gaussian Process Based Message Filtering for Robust Multi-Agent
Cooperation in the Presence of Adversarial Communication
Rupert Mitchell1, Jan Blumenkamp2 and Amanda Prorok2
Abstract— In this paper, we consider the problem of provid-
ing robustness to adversarial communication in multi-agent sys-
tems. Speciﬁcally, we propose a solution towards robust coop-
eration, which enables the multi-agent system to maintain high
performance in the presence of anonymous non-cooperative
agents that communicate faulty, misleading or manipulative in-
formation. In pursuit of this goal, we propose a communication
architecture based on Graph Neural Networks (GNNs), which is
amenable to a novel Gaussian Process (GP)-based probabilistic
model characterizing the mutual information between the
simultaneous communications of different agents due to their
physical proximity and relative position. This model allows
agents to locally compute approximate posterior probabilities,
or conﬁdences, that any given one of their communication
partners is being truthful. These conﬁdences can be used as
weights in a message ﬁltering scheme, thereby suppressing
the inﬂuence of suspicious communication on the receiving
agent’s decisions. In order to assess the efﬁcacy of our method,
we introduce a taxonomy of non-cooperative agents, which
distinguishes them by the amount of information available to
them. We demonstrate in two distinct experiments that our
method performs well across this taxonomy, outperforming
alternative methods. For all but the best informed adversaries,
our ﬁltering method is able to reduce the impact that non-
cooperative agents cause, reducing it to the point of negligibility,
and with negligible cost to performance in the absence of
adversaries.
Index Terms— Robustness, Multi-Agent Systems, Adversarial
Communication, Deep Learning, Gaussian Processes
I. INTRODUCTION
Many real-world problems require the coordination of
multiple autonomous agents [1], [2]. In fully decentralized
systems, agents not only need to know how to cooperate,
but also, how to communicate to most effectively coordinate
their actions in pursuit of a common goal. However, control
policies and communication protocols designed to optimally
coordinate the behavior of multiple agents are inherently
fragile with respect to unexpected behavior from any one
of these agents, unless they are speciﬁcally designed to be
robust. This fragility has been observed in the case of failures
or malfunctions [3], [4], in the case of purposeful (adversar-
ial) attacks [5], [6], as well as in worst-case scenarios, such
as byzantine collusion [7], [8].
While effective communication is key to successful coop-
eration, it is far from obvious what information is crucial
to the task, and what must be shared among agents. This
1Rupert Mitchell is with Department of Engineering, University of
Cambridge. (e-mail: rmjm3@cam.ac.uk).
2Jan Blumenkamp and Amanda Prorok are with Department of Computer
Science and Technology, University of Cambridge. (e-mail: {jb2270,
asp45}@cam.ac.uk).
question differs from problem to problem and the optimal
strategy is often unknown. Hand-engineered coordination
strategies often fail to deliver the desired performance, and
despite ongoing progress in this domain, ﬁrst-principles
based solutions still tend to scale poorly with growing agent
team sizes, and require substantial design effort. Recent
work has shown the promise of GNNs to learn explicit
communication strategies that enable complex multi-agent
coordination [9], [10], [11], [12]. GNNs exploit the fact that
inter-agent relationships can be represented as graphs, which
provide a mathematical description of the network topology.
In multi-agent systems, an agent is modeled as a node in the
graph, the connectivity of agents as edges, and the internal
state of an agent as a graph signal. The key attribute of
GNNs is that they operate in a localized manner, whereby
information is shared over a multi-hop communication net-
work through explicit communication with nearby neighbors
only, hence resulting in fully decentralizable policies.
While impressive results have been achieved, these multi-
agent learning approaches assume full cooperation, whereby
all agents share the same goal of maximizing a shared
global reward. There is a dearth of work that explores
whether agents can utilize machine learning to synthesize
communication policies that are robust to non-cooperative
or even adversarial communications from their neighbors.
In this work, we consider the case of learned communi-
cation in addition to learned control policies. We assume
that the purpose of communication is the aggregation of
observations across agents and therefore, without further
loss of generality with respect to the capabilities of the
overall communication architecture, we restrict messages to
be learned (and likely lossy) encodings of an agent’s local
observations. To the extent that messages convey information
about the global world, an agent can then examine this
information and potentially disregard a message if it contains
information that is incongruous with its expectations of the
state of the environment it is operating in.
While there is a rich body of work on encoding-based
anomaly detection (e.g., [13], [14], [15], [16], [17]), the
aforementioned setting distinguishes our work. Instead of de-
tecting individual anomalous observations, we are interested
detecting anomalous observations within sets of observation
encodings that are spatially inter-related. Speciﬁcally, we
expect the encodings communicated by spatially proximate
agents to share substantial mutual information, and that the
structure of this non-independence will itself be dependent
on the spatial arrangement of these agents in the world they
are observing.
arXiv:2012.00508v1  [cs.RO]  1 Dec 2020

We therefore propose a communication model, in which
each agent transmits an encoded version of its local obser-
vations generated by a neural network-based auto-encoder
which learns to represent these local observations in an
unsupervised manner. Leveraging the Auto-Encoding Varia-
tional Bayes (AEVB) framework introduced in [18], we co-
optimize this auto-encoder with a joint prior distribution over
the encoded observations of arbitrary sets of spatially prox-
imate agents in order to successfully capture the expected
mutual information between encodings. For this purpose we
use a GP with a learnable kernel function to represent a
distribution over functions from agent position to encodings,
functions whose values we take to have only been indirectly
observed at the ﬁnite set of points which happen to each be
the physical location of an agent.
We additionally propose a method of exploiting this prob-
abilistic model of encodings, and therefore also messages, to
construct a mechanism for detecting adversarial communica-
tion. In particular, once we express a prior belief about the
range of possible messages a malfunctioning or adversarial
agent might send in terms of our probabilistic model, we
can compare hypotheses regarding which nearby agents j of
some speciﬁc agent i are communicating accurate informa-
tion about their local region of the world, and thereby assign
posterior probabilities (subjective to agent i) of truthfulness
to each agent j. These subjective posterior probabilities,
which we refer to as conﬁdences, can be used as weights
in an attention-like modiﬁcation (e.g., [19]), of any GNN
layer that uses sum aggregation. The resulting modiﬁed layer
performs identically to the unmodiﬁed version in the limit of
high conﬁdences of agent i in every one of its neighbors, but
completely negates the impact of the communication of an
agent j on the output of the layer for agent i in the opposite
limit of low conﬁdence of agent i in j.
Related Work.
There is a recent body of work address-
ing multi-agent robustness from the perspective of robust
consensus in the presence of non-cooperative agents [4],
[20], [21]. These methods provide guarantees of robustness
up to some maximum number of non-cooperative agents
subject to the condition of sufﬁcient redundant connectivity
(deﬁned by (r, s)-robustness metrics [22], [4], [23]) in the
agents’ communication network. The key difference between
these methods and ours is that they aim to robustly reach a
consensus on speciﬁc global values based on local infor-
mation. We generalize this approach, as the class of robust
communication problems we consider do not necessarily
involve the explicit estimation of any such global values.
Outlier-robust estimation algorithms such as RANSAC [24],
[25], [26] are inapplicable to our class of problems for similar
reasons.
We identify two broad classes of previous work appli-
cable to our class of problems. Some authors focus on
optimizing the collective control policy itself for robustness
to communication or hardware failure [27], [28], while
others focus on the detection of malicious communication,
either by dynamic watermarking, physical ﬁngerprinting or
inconsistencies between reported location and directional
variations in wireless signal strength [5], [29], [30]. None
of these methods exploit the same source of information as
ours: inconsistencies between the semantic implications of
received messages, and so while they may be complementary
to our approach they are fundamentally different in character.
Contributions.
Our contributions are fourfold:
(i) We introduce a novel probabilistic model of the obser-
vations of multi-agent systems which captures the position-
dependent mutual information between the observations re-
ceived by spatially proximate agents. This model incorpo-
rates a learned encoding of the observations of an individual
agent, and so is inherently also a model of the mutual
information between these encodings, which are suitable for
use as messages with a learned communication channel such
as a GNN.
(ii) We introduce a taxonomy of adversarial agents in order
to characterize the breadth of the adversarial communication
problem. Speciﬁcally, we distinguish between adversaries
with different levels of knowledge about the cooperative
agents, since an optimized attack varies substantially in
strength depending on what information was used in its
optimization.
(iii) We use our probabilistic model to construct a message
ﬁltering strategy that uses conﬁdence weights for erroneous
or malicious communication in a networked multi-agent
system and integrate this mechanism with a standard GNN
communication channel via an attention-like modiﬁcation.
The modiﬁed GNN layer is capable of mitigating or entirely
negating the impact of the communication of adversaries
from across our taxonomy on the behavior of the overall
system. Importantly, our conﬁdence weighting mechanism
imposes very low or no performance costs in the absence of
such adversarial communication.
(iv) We demonstrate these innovations in two distinct
experiments. (1) The ﬁrst experiment considers a static group
classiﬁcation problem chosen for its complex position-based
inter-agent observation correlations. (2) The second exper-
iment deals with a cooperative multi-agent reinforcement
learning scenario where a non-cooperative agent defecting
against the group can attempt to manipulate them for its
own purposes.
II. PROBLEM STATEMENT
We consider a set of N agents in 2D planar space. The
agents can communicate with each other via a network which
can be described by a dynamic graph G(V, E(t)) where our
set of agents V form its vertices (i.e. |V| = N) and its edge
set E(t) ⊆V × V consists of ordered pairs (vi, vj) for every
such pair of agents for which vi can communicate directly
with vj, and can in general can vary over time t. We consider
each agent to have a communication radius rc and to be
able to communicate directly with any other agent within
this radius, i.e. (vi, vj) ∈E(t) ⇔||xij(t)|| ≤rc where
xij(t) = xj(t) −xi(t) and xi(t) is the two-dimensional
position vector of agent i in the world at time t. An agent’s
neighborhood Ni(t) = {vj : (vi, vj) ∈E(t)} is then the
set of all agents within its communication radius, including
itself, at a given time. We additionally assume a agent i to

have access to the position relative to it xij(t) of any agent
j ∈Ni(t) in its neighborhood.
At time t each agent i receives a set of observations
oi(t) of its local region of the world in the form of a
vector of real numbers. It constructs a message mi(t), also
a real valued vector, describing these observations via some
encoding function enc of its observations. (That is, mi(t) =
enc(oi(t)).) It communicates this message to every other
agent in Ni(t) and receives a message mj(t) for every agent
j ∈Ni(t). It then calculates a set of features fi(t) from these
received messages by some aggregation function agg. (That
is, fi(t) = agg(oi(t), {mj(t) : j ∈Ni(t)}).) Finally, it uses
these features to either estimate some state of the overall
world, or to determine an action to take in this world as
pi, via a policy function pol(fi(t)). We assume that there
is only one round of messages exchanged and, in particular,
that each mi(t) is not re-transmitted beyond Ni(t). Since we
consider only the communication at a given time instant in
the rest of this work, we will suppress the time dependence
of variables from here, denoting e.g. xi(t) as xi.
We consider a networked system of N agents. N −F of
these agents are cooperative while F are non-cooperative, as
deﬁned below. We shall restrict the N cooperative agents to
be homogeneous (i.e. to share enc, agg and pol), since
heterogeneous agent teams are not the focus of this paper.
Deﬁnition 1 (Cooperative Agent): A cooperative agent
uses the shared cooperative encoding, aggregation and pol-
icy functions encC, aggC and polC respectively. These
functions are optimized to achieve some shared objective,
the cooperative objective.
A non-cooperative agent is in principle any agent which
does not ﬁt all of these conditions, however in this paper
all non-cooperative agents a we shall consider differ on at
least the encoding function enca, since we are interested
in the ways in which a non-cooperative agent can affect the
interests of cooperative agents by misleading them (inten-
tionally or otherwise), as opposed to communicating honestly
and accurately but still taking non-cooperative actions in the
world according to some non-cooperative policy pola.
Deﬁnition 2 (Robust Message Aggregation): A particular
choice of cooperative aggregation function aggC is consid-
ered robust with respect to a non-cooperative agent a if a
does not cause the cooperative agents to perform less well
at their cooperative objective via its messages ma.
Problem 1 (Robust Multi-Agent Cooperation): Given a
networked system of N −F cooperative agents and F
anonymous, unknown non-cooperative agents, learn a robust
message aggregation mechanism that mitigates the negative
impact of messages sent by the F non-cooperative agents.
By the F non-cooperative agents being ‘unknown’ we
mean that the behavior of the non-cooperative agents is
unavailable to train against when learning the cooperative ag-
gregation mechanism. By them being ‘anonymous’ we mean
that they cannot be differentiated from cooperative agents by
any means other than examining their communication.
ci(j)
K
xji
mj
z(s)
j
GNN
agg
pol
pi
j ∈Ni
enc
oi
mi
enc
oa
ma
enc
ob
mb
enc
oc
mc
rc
Ni = {a, b, i}
∼
fi
Fig. 1.
Schematic overview of our proposed message aggregation
method from the perspective of agent i, represented by the enlarged circle.
Messages mj are received from every other agent (circle) inside agent
i’s neighborhood Ni. Latent vectors z(s)
j
are sampled from the posterior
distributions represented by each mj and combined in a GNN layer
using attention weights calculated by a function ci(j) based on the full
distributions and the relative positions xji.
A. Assumptions
Since there are many possible potentially harmful choices
of non-cooperative behavior, goal-directed or otherwise, for
any particular cooperative objective, we assume that the
cooperative agents do not have any knowledge of what, if
anything, the non-cooperative agent(s) are trying to achieve,
let alone the particular communication strategy that the non-
cooperative agents will therefore pursue. We also assume
that the communication strategy of the cooperative agents is
being formulated without knowing the level of knowledge
that the non-cooperative agents will have about this strategy.
While the previous assumption serves to ensure general-
izability of our solution, we assume additional restrictions
to specify the category of solution we wish to develop.
Speciﬁcally, we focus on exploiting position-dependent cor-
relations between agent observations to detect anomalous
communication, and we therefore place less emphasis on
other potential sources of information which could be used
to identify an adversarial agent. For example, we ignore the
non-communication behavior of agents, and we only crudely
check for implausibly high or low precision in communi-
cated posteriors, relying mostly on whether the messages
are consistent with each other at their speciﬁed precision
levels. Finally, we consider only the information available in
received communication from a given time instant, and do
not check for inter-temporal consistency.
We assume the sole beneﬁt of communication for the
cooperative agents is aggregation of information contained in
the observations oi across neighborhoods. (Note that this also
constitutes substantial information about the likely actions
of a neighboring cooperative agent i since polC is ﬁxed
and known.) We therefore assume without further loss of
generality that each agent i communicates its approximate
latent space posterior mi = q(z|o)i to each member of the
set of neighboring agents in its communication range Ni.

B. A Taxonomy of Non-Cooperative Agents
In order to provide a more ﬁne-grained evaluation of
our method, we distinguish between four types of non-
cooperative agent:
1) Faulty. The communication behavior of the non-
cooperative agent is not directed towards the accom-
plishment of any particular goal, e.g. the agent is
simply faulty.
2) Naive. The non-cooperative agent’s behavior was op-
timized using knowledge of encC and polC as well
as the effect of aggC on normal communication only.
The communication behavior of the non-cooperative
agent may therefore be actively manipulative, but the
non-cooperative agent is unaware of, and therefore
makes no attempts to evade, any manipulation detec-
tion mechanisms the cooperative agents may use.
3) Cautious. In addition to the information available to the
Naive agent, this agent is optimized with the knowl-
edge that there may be some manipulation detection
mechanism, but not any knowledge of its speciﬁcs. The
agent therefore limits manipulative communication to
lie within the range of normal communication of a
cooperative agent.
4) Omniscient. The non-cooperative agent has perfect
knowledge of the communication and detection strate-
gies being followed by the cooperative agents and can
optimize directly against them. The agent is exactly as
manipulative as it can get away with being, given the
countermeasures actually deployed in aggC.
Since we do not assume knowledge of the type of non-
cooperative agent, we are interested in designing a method
that reduces the likely impact over this broad spectrum of
non-cooperative behavior on the achievement of the cooper-
ative objective. That is, it is desirable for the countermeasures
to work as well as possible if the non-cooperative agents
have low to medium knowledge of countermeasures, e.g. are
Naive or Cautious, but only if this does not make the system
much more vulnerable in cases of high knowledge, especially
Omniscient agents.
III. PRELIMINARIES
In this section we outline the differentiable communication
channel which we build on, the GNN, and the inference
framework we use, AEVB, in addition to a well known
instantiation of this, the Variational Autoencoder (VAE).
A. Graph Attention Neural Networks
As described earlier in Sec. II, we represent the commu-
nication network of our agents as a graph G(V, E), with
each member of the node set V representing an agent.
We represent the initial observations of our agents as a
function whose domain is the node set V. GNNs provide
a means of aggregating this information across nodes while
transmitting information only along graph edges and keeping
all computation local to the nodes. Speciﬁcally, we consider
a neural network layer of the form
gi = σ

h0(fi) +
X
j∈Ni
αij sij h1(fj)


(1)
where Ni is the neighborhood of agent i, fi are input features
and gi are output features, h0 and h1 are learnable linear
transforms, σ is a pointwise nonlinearity, αij is an attention
coefﬁcient that indicates the importance of node j’s features
to node i [19] and sij is a normalizing constant that accounts
for variability in neighborhood sizes:
sij =
1
p
|Ni||Nj|
.
(2)
This layer clearly does not require information from
outside the communication neighborhood of agent i, and the
computation can be done locally on agent i. This formulation
is equivalent to a GNN layer [31] restricted to one commu-
nication hop between neighbors. The core of our work lies
in the derivation of the graph self-attention coefﬁcient αij,
which we describe in more detail in Sec. VI-B. In contrast
to Graph Attention Networks [19], we do not learn αij, but
instead calculate it with the conﬁdence weight function ci(j)
(17) based on the full posterior latent space distributions
contained in received messages mj and the relative positions
xij. These calculated attentions are shown integrated into the
layer in (12) and discussed further there.
B. Auto-Encoding Variational Bayes (AEVB)
The AEVB framework introduces learning and inference
with directed probabilistic models and, in particular, its
instantiation in the form of the VAE [18]. Each datapoint
o in a dataset is modeled as having been generated by
a random process involving an unobserved latent variable
z. Speciﬁcally, z is ﬁrst drawn from a distribution p(z; θ)
and then a value for o is drawn from p(o|z; θ), where
the parameters θ specify a point in some space of such
parameterized models.
In order to ﬁt such a model to a dataset it is neces-
sary to be able to estimate the marginal likelihood of the
dataset according to the model speciﬁed by some point
θ in parameter space. The posterior probability p(z|o; θ)
is unfortunately in general intractable, so they introduce a
variational posterior q(z|o; φ) as an approximation to the
true posterior, parameterized by φ. This allows the marginal
likelihood for a given datapoint to be stated as:
log p(o; θ) = DKL(q(z|o; φ)||p(z|o; θ)) + L(o; θ, φ)
(3)
where L(o; θ, φ) is the evidence lower bound:
log p(o; θ) ≥L(o; θ, φ) = −DKL(q(z|o; φ)||p(z; θ))
+ Eq(z|o;φ) log p(o|z; θ)
(4)
The parameters θ and φ can then be optimized to maximize
the sum of L(o; θ, φ) across all datapoints, as a proxy for
the similar sum of log p(o; θ, φ).
VAEs are introduced in [18] as a simple example of
this framework. They are obtained by letting p(z; θ) be an

isotropic Gaussian and q(z|o; φ) be a multivariate Gaussian
of diagonal covariance structure. The distribution p(o|z; θ)
is chosen to be either Gaussian or Bernoulli, depending on
the type of data being considered. The distribution q(z|o; φ)
can then be seen as a probabilistic encoder, and p(o|z; θ) as
a probabilistic decoder.
IV. AUTO-ENCODING COMMUNICATION
In this section we introduce our model of the communica-
tion of cooperative agents. This model allows us to express
hypotheses regarding the truthfulness of a given agent in a
neighborhood, so that they can be compared and, ultimately,
conﬁdence values assigned to the agent’s messages.
A. Model of Cooperative Communication
Similarly to a simple VAE, we assume the random process
generating the observations oi of a particular agent i to in-
volve some hidden latent variable zi. We assume that each oi
is then drawn from a distribution P(oi|zi; θ) independently
of the other latent vectors.
We must break from the simple model of an independent
VAE for each agent because we expect that when multiple
nearby agents are receiving observations of the same world,
these observations will share mutual information, and there-
fore not be independent. We therefore, instead of drawing
each zi (for each agent i in the neighborhood of some
arbitrary agent j, Nj) independently from some position-
invariant distribution P(z; ψ), draw all the zis simultane-
ously from a common GP over position
P(Z|X; ψ) = GP(0, Kψ(X))
(5)
where Z = [zi : i ∈Nj]T , X = [xi : i ∈Nj]T , xi is the
position of agent i, and Kψ is a kernel function generating
the covariance matrices of this GP and is parameterized by
ψ. We choose a GP here because the starting point of a
VAE gives us latent space priors which are independently
Gaussian across agents, and the most obvious reﬁnement to
introduce mutual information within a neighborhood is to
let them be jointly but non-independently Gaussian across
said neighborhood. Letting the structure of this mutual
information vary by spatial arrangement implies a GP.
In terms of the whole neighborhood Nj our decoder is
then
P(O|Z; θ) =
Y
i∈Nj
P(oi|zi; θ)
(6)
where O = [oi : i ∈Nj]T and each independent P(oi|zi)
is either Bernoulli or a diagonally covariant Gaussian de-
pending on the observation data. (In contrast to [18] we
distinguish between the sets of parameters for P(Z|X) and
P(O|Z) since we will later optimize these parameters by
different methods.) Similarly we choose the encoder (or
approximate latent space posterior) to be
Q(Z|O; φ) =
Y
i∈Nj
Q(zi|oi; φ)
(7)
where each Q(zi|oi; φ), the output of a per-agent encoder,
is an independent diagonally covariant Gaussian. A similar
approach was presented in [32], which suggests a similar
case of integration between GP and VAE, but assumes a
particularly simple form for the covariances so that the model
is less expressive. The authors are interested in a substantially
different application: the domain on which the functions
drawn from their Gaussian Process are deﬁned is an abstract
feature space, unlike our physical space of agent positions.
B. Alternative Hypotheses for Adversarial Communication
We shall choose encC to be the probabilistic per-agent
encoder of our AEVB model: Q(zi|oi; φ). Since the posterior
provided by this function is a diagonally covariant Gaussian,
our messages mi represent it via a vector of means and a
vector of standard deviations.
In order to assess the truthfulness of the messages received
from neighboring agents, we compare three hypotheses re-
garding their origin. While the received messages are raw
posteriors over possible latent vectors z of unknown origin,
we assume for this analysis that they were generated by the
authentic encC function and express our hypotheses in terms
of the origins of the observations oi that could have produced
them. That is, in contrast to the likely reality, our model of
general adversarial communication is therefore not a process
which directly outputs arbitrary messages, but a process
which generates an imaginary set of observations from some
(potentially unrealistic) distribution and then encodes them
faithfully.
As our null hypothesis we have:
• H0 (Truth): We assume that all agents who are telling
the truth have had their observations oi generated by our
best ﬁt model of the world and that these observations
are therefore correlated as expected based on their
physical positions in the world.
Our alternative hypotheses are:
• H1 (Plausible Lie): This represents an agent who is
telling a lie by describing a plausible scenario it could
have found itself in, but which is otherwise not nec-
essarily related to its actual surroundings. The model
is that its observation oi has been generated by our
best ﬁt model of the world, but with its latent variable
generated via a separate and independent draw from
the GP over positions. Its latent vector zi is therefore
uncorrelated with those of the other agents, regardless
of their position or whether they are telling the truth.
• H2 (Implausible Lie): In order to account for the fact
that an agent is not restricted to telling lies that describe
plausible scenarios, we need a special world model
which contains those implausible scenarios which are
expressible in our latent space. In this model the random
process generating the observation oi is exactly the
same as our best ﬁt model, except that the latent vector
zi is drawn from a very high variance isotropic Gaussian
instead of the best ﬁt GP. (For the sake of simplicity
we then take the limit of high variance and therefore
obtain a uniform distribution.)

V. MODEL IMPLEMENTATION
In this section we describe the procedure by which our
model of cooperative communication may be ﬁtted to a
dataset. We also specify our choice of kernel function for
our GP along with its justiﬁcation.
A. Model Fitting
We have three sets of parameters: θ for our decoder, φ
for our encoder and ψ for our GP. Analogously with VAEs,
we optimize these to maximize an approximate lower bound
of the marginal likelihood of observations oi observed in
training conditional on agent positions xi for agents i in
some neighborhood Nj. (We have many such Njs in our
dataset and therefore maximize the sum of lower bounds on
log likelihoods across the dataset.) The following identity
regarding the marginal likelihood of data can be obtained as
in [18]:
log P(O|X; θ, ψ) =DKL(Q(Z|O; φ)||P(Z|O; θ, ψ))
−DKL(Q(Z|O; φ)||P(Z|X; ψ))
+ EQ(Z|O;φ) log P(O|Z; θ)
(8)
and since the ﬁrst term is non-negative, being a KL diver-
gence, the second and third term together represent a lower
bound on the likelihood of the data.
We therefore optimize ψ to minimize the following pair-
wise KL loss, since the kernel function it parameterizes is
only guaranteed to produce valid covariances during training
for pairs of agents with our implementation (see Sec. V-B):
KLψ =
X
i∈N
X
j̸=i∈N
DKL(Q(Zi,j|Oi,j; φ)||P(Zi,j|Xi,j; ψ))
(9)
where Zi,j = [zi, zj]T , and similarly for Oi,j and Xi,j.
This is equivalent to treating every pair of agents in Nj
as an independent sample from the GP and is therefore an
approximation.
For θ and φ we deﬁne a KL loss
KLφ = DKL(Q(ZNj|ONj; φ)||P(ZNj|XNj; ψ))
(10)
and a reconstruction loss
R = −EQ(ZNj |ONj ;φ) log P(ONj|ZNj; θ)
(11)
where ZNj = [zi : i ∈Nj]T and similarly for O and
X. We optimize θ and φ to minimize a sum (as in [33])
βKLφ + R weighted by the hyperparameter β and fall
back to
β
|Nj|−1KLψ + R if numerical problems occur early
in training due to negative determinants of the covariance
matrix required to calculate P(ZNj|XNj; ψ).
B. Choice of Kernel
In order to clearly demonstrate that our method is effective
without knowledge of absolute position, we implement our
kernel function so that covariances are explicitly depen-
dent only on relative position. With our implementation
this comes at the cost of occasional inconsistent generated
covariance matrices early in training. (Implementation details
in Appendix II.) We also restrict the single-agent internal
feature distribution to be an isotropic Gaussian, similar to
a VAE. We otherwise choose our kernel to be maximally
expressive with regard to possible structures of correlation
between the features of different agents.
We use a naive implementation of the calculations involv-
ing our GP and do not optimize its structure to maximize
computational efﬁciency because this is unusually unim-
portant in our case. This is because the main scalability
challenge with GPs is that computation time naively scales
cubically with the number of datapoints considered simulta-
neously, but we only ever simultaneously consider the data
from within an agent’s neighborhood, which is inherently
limited by the communication radius rc.
VI. MESSAGE FILTERING FOR ROBUST COOPERATION
In this section we show how conﬁdence weighting can be
introduced to the simple GNN layer of Sec. III-A in order
to ﬁlter out inconsistent messages, and how such weights
may be calculated using our model of communication from
Sec. IV.
A. Message Filtering through Conﬁdence Weighting
Each agent i communicates its latent space posterior
mi = q(z|o)i to every other agent within its communication
range rc. Each agent then processes this information by
sampling a set of latent space features from the posteriors
and using them as the input of a simple GNN aggregation
layer, producing a local set of features fi:
fi = σ

h0(z(s)
i ) +
X
j∈Ni
ci(j)
s
1
|Ni||Nj|h1

z(s)
j



(12)
where z(s)
i
∼q(z|o)i is the sample from the posterior com-
municated by agent i, h0 and h1 are linear transformations, σ
is a pointwise nonlinearity and ci(j) is a weighting function
yet to be deﬁned (see Sec. VI-B).
It can easily be seen that this formulation is equivalent to
the unmodiﬁed version, (1) introduced in Sec. III-A, in the
case where cj(i) = 1. We set the conﬁdence weight ci(j) to
be an approximate probability that agent j is being truthful,
based on all other communication received by agent i. This
approximate probability is calculated by comparing different
hypotheses corresponding to truth or different varieties of lie
as introduced in Sec. II-B, via a procedure described below
in Sec. VI-B. For sufﬁciently high subjective conﬁdence of
agent i in its neighbors j ∈Ni, all of the ci(j) then approach
1 and we recover the initial unmodiﬁed GNN layer behavior.
B. Computation of Conﬁdence Weights for Messages
A neighborhood hypothesis h is an element of the set
{H0, H1, H2}Nj, that is, some function assigning one of the
single-agent hypotheses H0, H1 or H2 to every agent in some
neighborhood Nj. The agents in Nj sharing a particular
assignment according to some speciﬁc h together form a

subset of Nj. Three such subsets Gh, Bh and Oh may thus
be formed for H0, H1 and H2 respectively. The latent space
prior corresponding to a hypothesis h is then
P(Z|X; ψ, h) = P(ZGh|XGh; ψ)×
Y
i∈Bh
P(zi; ψ, H1) ×
Y
i∈Oh
P(zi; ψ, H2)
(13)
where ZGh = [zi : i ∈Gh] and XGh = [xi : i ∈Gh], and we
have exploited the fact that H1 and H2 imply observation
independence from other agents.
We can then compare different hypotheses h via the
approximate log likelihood:
log P(O|X; ψ, θ, h) ≈
−DKL(Q(Z|O; φ)||P(Z|X; ψ, h)) + C
(14)
where C is constant across hypotheses (derivation in Ap-
pendix I). We assign priors to each neighborhood hypothesis
based on priors for each single-agent hypothesis:
log P(h) = |Gh| log P(H0)+
|Bh| log P(H1) + |Oh| log P(H2)
(15)
We compare some set H ⊆{H0, H1, H2}Nj of such
hypotheses, for example {h ∈{H0, H1, H2}Nj : |Gh| ≥
|Nj| −1} if it is known that the total number of adversaries
F is at most one. In combination with the log likelihood of
(15), we obtain a posterior probability for each hypothesis
P(h|O, X; ψ, θ) via Bayes’ theorem.
P(h|O, X; ψ, θ) =
exp (log P(O|X; h, ψ, θ) + log P(h))
exp
P
ρ∈H log P(O|X; ρ, ψ, θ) + log P(ρ)

(16)
Marginalizing over H we then obtain the subjective prob-
ability assigned by agent j to agent i being truthful, that
is, the probability that i ∈Gh for whichever h reﬂects
reality. We use this to deﬁne the conﬁdence weight cj(i) =
Pj(i is truthful|O, X; ψ, θ) assigned by agent j to i:
cj(i) = Pj(i is truthful|Oj, Xj; ψ, θ) =
X
h∈Hj s.t. i∈Gh
P(h|Oj, Xj; ψ, θ)
(17)
where the newly introduced subscripts j re-emphasize de-
pendence of some parameters on our initial choice of neigh-
borhood Nj.
Since for any single agent P(H0), P(H1) and P(H2) are
assumed exhaustive and must therefore sum to 1, we retain
only s1 = log P(H0) −log P(H1) and s2 = log P(H0) −
log P(H2) as tunable sensitivity parameters.
VII. EXPERIMENTS
In this section, we present two experiments demonstrat-
ing our conﬁdence weighting method. The ﬁrst experiment
focuses on a cooperative perception task. Its purpose is to
examine and compare the performance of our weighting
method with alternatives. The second experiment introduces
a
i
b
c
ma
mb
9
9
Ni = {a, b, i}
rc
ob
xi
xai
xa
Fig. 2.
UAV swarm ﬂying over image with limited individual ﬁelds of
view, resulting in an observation oj for each agent j. The positions xj can
be expressed as relative positions, here visualized for agent i and a as xai.
Nearby UAVs can communicate, as indicated by the waved lines.
the time dimension, allowing agents to take sequential deci-
sions based on the received messages. We assess the impact
of our robust message aggregation scheme on performance,
when compared with non-robust baselines, as well as an
alternative robust benchmark method.
A. Cooperative Image Classiﬁcation
In our ﬁrst case study we consider a basic multi-agent
communication scenario. The cooperative agents share their
local observations with each other in order to each attempt
to estimate a global categorical state. In practice this could
be a swarm of UAVs observing the terrain they ﬂy over with
cameras and sharing their observations with each other, as
illustrated in Fig. 2.
1) Setup: To emulate this setup, we choose the CIFAR-
10 dataset of 32 × 32 pixel images to provide our global
world, with the image category being the global state to
be estimated. We restrict the dataset to only the ﬁrst two
classes (airplanes and automobiles) for simplicity, giving
us a training dataset of 10,000 images and a test dataset
of 2000 images. We allow our agents to observe the lo-
cal region of the image near them in a 9 × 9 grid, and
distribute the N = 6 agents uniformly across the image,
subject to the condition that their vision ﬁeld not extend
past the image’s boundary. We allow agent position to be
continuous by linearly interpolating between pixel values.
We also simplify the communication topology by letting the
maximum communication range be inﬁnite (leading to a fully
connected communication graph).
2) Training: Training of the cooperative agents consists of
two stages. First we train the encoder (encC), decoder and
kernel function to represent our dataset, using Convolutional
Neural Networks (CNNs) for the encoder and decoder. We
then train a GNN layer without any conﬁdence weighting and
a policy layer consisting of an Multilayer Perceptron (MLP)
using a cross-entropy classiﬁcation loss. We choose the
sensitivity parameters of the conﬁdence weighting scheme
s1 and s2 so that the mean conﬁdence weight assigned to
a cooperative agent by the weighting scheme described in
Sec. VI-B is 0.9.
Our adversarial agents transform the authentic message
mC they would communicate if they were cooperative to

the message they actually transmit ma via an MLP1. We
also train them in a two stage process. In the ﬁrst stage
we include the mean squared error of the message ma with
respect to mC as an extra loss term in order to prevent the
MLP from failing to ﬁnd a region of the parameter space in
which its messages are assigned non-negligible conﬁdence
weights. We remove this extra term in the second phase of
training.
3) Alternative Conﬁdence Weighting Schemes: We intro-
duce two, simpler, weighting schemes for the purpose of
comparison with the conﬁdence weighting scheme described
in section Sec. VI-B, referred to in the rest of this section
as WGP. The alternative scheme WG is similar to WGP,
but it asks whether each message received is individually
plausible while ignoring inter-agent correlations. Since the
prior distribution for a message considered independently
is an zero-mean isotropic Gaussian in our model, we also
introduce an even simpler scheme, WMAX: assign 1 to any
message with squared magnitude < γ and 0 otherwise, for
some threshold γ. We tune both of these methods to assign
an average weight to authentic cooperative agents similar to
our WGP method.
4) Results: We evaluate the performance of the WGP
scheme in the presence of four examples of non-cooperative
agents from the knowledge classes introduced in Sec. II-B,
Faulty, Naive, Cautious and Omniscient with respect to the
WGP scheme. We consider a test scenario in which F, the
number of non-cooperative agents, is either 0 or 1. Fig. 3
shows the distribution and mean of the loss function of the
cooperative agents, with each column corresponding to a
different choice of non-cooperative agents knowledge class
relative to the scheme in question, the top row corresponding
to no weighting scheme, the middle rows corresponding to
the alternative WMAX and WG schemes, and the bottom row
showing the WGP scheme. Tab. I shows the corresponding
classiﬁcation accuracy for these losses, and it can be seen
that increases in loss are mirrored by decreases in accuracy.
Fig. 4 shows the loss distribution of the cooperative agents in
the presence of the non-cooperative agents from the bottom
row of Fig. 3, but with no conﬁdence weighting instead of
with WGP. This is different from the top row in the case of
the Omniscient agent, since for Fig. 4 the non-cooperative
agent’s knowledge class is still deﬁned relative to WGP, not
no weighting. In Fig. 6 we again show the loss distribution
of cooperative agents, but we ﬁx the weighting scheme as
WGP and the non-cooperative agent class as Cautious and
use a total number of agents N = 8 instead of N = 6. We
then vary the total number of non-cooperative agents F, and
the maximum number of non-cooperative agents considered
possible by the conﬁdence weighting scheme, Fmax
Fig. 3 shows that in the absence of any non-cooperative
agents the WGP scheme causes a negligible 0.1% increase
in shared loss. In the absence of a weighting scheme,
adversaries Faulty, Naive, Cautious and Omniscient cause
loss increases of 0.024 (4.7%), 2.934 (578%), 0.314 (61.8%)
1This architecture choice means that the adversary need only learn the
identity function in order to begin bypassing any ﬁltering system, since it
is then indistinguishable from a cooperative agent, though harmless.
0.508
Cooperative
0.532
Faulty
3.442∗
Naive
0.822
Cautious
None
= Naive∗
Omniscient
0.525
0.545
0.534
0.841
WMAX
N/A
0.512
0.532
0.516
N/A
0.820
WG
0
1
2
3
0.509
0
1
2
3
0.516
0
1
2
3
0.516
0
1
2
3
0.516
0
1
2
3
0.656
WGP
Fig. 3.
Cooperative loss distributions for combinations of weighting
schemes and adversary knowledge classes, the mean of each loss distribution
marked with a vertical red line. Where the deﬁnition of a knowledge class
is relative to a particular weighting scheme (Cautious, Omniscient), the
adversaries considered in each row are relative to the weighting scheme
of that row. (*) Note that the distribution for the Naive adversary with no
weighting is cropped so that only its mean is visible on the x axis, since it
is substantially different in mean to the other distributions. Note also that
the Omniscient adversary in the absence of any weighting is exactly the
Naive adversary.
0
1
2
3
0.508
Cooperative
0
1
2
3
0.532
Faulty
0
1
2
3
3.442
Naive
0
1
2
3
0.822
Cautious
0
1
2
3
0.682
Omniscient
Fig. 4.
Loss distributions of cooperative agents in the presence of the
adversaries compared against WGP in the bottom row of Fig. 3, but in the
absence of a weighting scheme. The column names are relative to WGP.
and 0.174 (34.2%) respectively, as seen by comparing the
later columns of Fig. 4 with its ﬁrst. Comparing the bottom
row of Fig. 3 with Fig. 4, we see that the introduction of the
WGP scheme reduces these loss increases by 33%, 99.7%,
97.5% and 15% respectively, almost entirely negating the
effects of the Naive and Cautious adversaries.
Fig. 5 is analogous to the lower three rows of Fig. 3, but
shows the distribution of conﬁdence weights assigned by the
cooperative agents to the non-cooperative agent instead of
the loss of the cooperative agents. Examining these results,
we can see that WGP assigns consistently low weights to
adversaries Faulty, Naive and Cautious, but not to Omni-
scient. We conclude that WGP detects the communication
of the Faulty adversary but only reduces the extra loss by
33% with respect to no weighting because the unmitigated
extra loss is small, whereas WGP only reduces the extra loss
of adversary Omniscient by 15% because it does not detect
its communication as easily. Also noteworthy in Fig. 5 is
0.890
Cooperative
0.945
Faulty
0.000
Naive
1.000
Cautious
WMAX
N/A
Omniscient
0.946
0.948
0.000
N/A
0.707
WG
0
1
0.949
0
1
0.004
0
1
0.000
0
1
0.000
0
1
0.859
WGP
Fig. 5.
Distributions of conﬁdence weights assigned by the three weighting
schemes to all adversaries considered in Fig. 3.

TABLE I
COOPERATIVE CLASSIFICATION ACCURACY FOR FIG. 3.
Cooperative
Faulty
Naive
Cautious
Omniscient
None
0.750
0.742
0.502
0.549
N/A
WMAX
0.720
0.714
0.723
0.563
N/A
WG
0.745
0.727
0.733
N/A
0.540
WGP
0.762
0.746
0.752
0.735
0.635
the comparison between the weights assigned to Faulty and
Cautious adversaries. While the differences in excess loss
with Faulty adversaries were small between schemes due
to the low impact of the Faulty adversary even completely
unﬁltered, it can clearly be seen that WGP detects and ﬁlters
out the Faulty and Cautious adversaries perfectly. In contrast
WMAX and WG assign mean conﬁdence weights of 0.945
and 0.948 to the Faulty adversary respectively, and WMAX
assigns a mean weight of 1.00 to the Cautious adversary,
equivalent to no weighting scheme at all.
We now evaluate alternative weighting schemes WMAX
and WG, referring to the second and third rows of Fig. 3.
In the presence of adversary Faulty WMAX increased the
extra loss by 54% and WG left it unchanged, as compared
to the WGP’s 33% reduction. Against adversary Naive, all
schemes were able to reduce the extra loss by > 99%. The
results with Omniscient adversaries are more interesting, and
we shall compare the two most effective schemes, WG and
WGP in this respect. Against their respective Omniscient
adversaries we can see from the ﬁnal column that WG and
WGP incur excess losses with respect to the cooperative
baseline loss (0.508) of 0.312 and 0.148 respectively, a
difference of a factor of two in favor of WGP. We can also
contrast these schemes’ performance against each other’s
Omniscient adversaries, though this is less important. Since
the Cautious agent we used for WGP is actually identical
to the Omniscient agent of WG, we can see that WGP cuts
down the excess loss with this adversary to 0.008, a reduction
of 97.4% with respect to WG. In contrast, the WG scheme
is only able to reduce the excess loss caused by WGP’s
Omniscient adversary from 0.148 to 0.106 (not shown in
ﬁgures) in comparison to WGP itself, a reduction of only
28%, showing that WGP has broader effectiveness across
adversaries than WG.
Finally, we see in Fig. 6 the loss distribution (correspond-
ing accuracies in Tab. II) when we generalize our method to
various numbers of adversarial agents F and a different total
number of agents N. The results are for WGP in the presence
of the Cautious adversary with N = 8 with varying numbers
of adversaries (F) and varying maximum F considered by
the conﬁdence weighting scheme (Fmax). We see that so
long as Fmax >= F the weighting scheme is able to
substantially mitigate the effect of the Cautious adversaries.
We expect that this consistency of performance across F
values generalizes across adversaries, though performance
with Fmax > 1 is unlikely to improve on that of Fmax = 1
in cases where that original performance was less striking,
e.g. with the Omniscient adversary.
0.504
Fmax = 1
0.506
Fmax = 2
0.508
F = 1
Fmax = 3
0.750
0.520
0.525
F = 2
0
1
2
3
1.080
0
1
2
3
0.801
0
1
2
3
0.544
F = 3
Fig. 6.
Cooperative loss distributions for WGP in the presence of the
Cautious adversary. In contrast to Fig. 3 we consider N = 8 for this
comparison. Each row corresponds to a choice of the actual number F
of adversaries present, while each column corresponds to the maximum
number of adversaries Fmax considered possible by the weighting scheme.
TABLE II
COOPERATIVE CLASSIFICATION ACCURACY FOR FIG. 6.
Fmax = 1
Fmax = 2
Fmax = 3
F = 1
0.768
0.746
0.751
F = 2
0.578
0.748
0.737
F = 3
0.522
0.536
0.707
B. Cooperative Coverage
In our second case study, we consider the multi-agent
coverage path planning problem in a Reinforcement Learning
(RL) setting as described in [6]. In this setting, a non-
cooperative agent competes with cooperative agents for cov-
erage. In contrast to the prior case study, the non-cooperative
agent’s objective is the same cooperative agents’ objective
(i.e., not its negation). Here, the non-cooperative agent is
simply self-interested, meaning that it does not share the
cooperative agents’ global reward. In [6], we showed how
this reward structure enabled the self-interested agent to
learn manipulative communication policies (beneﬁting its
selﬁsh goal). In the following set of results, we aim to show
that our message ﬁltering strategy is able to mitigate the
impact of its adversarial communication policy. Speciﬁcally,
we demonstrate how conﬁdence weighting can detect and
mitigate manipulative communications for the Naive and
Omniscient case.
1) Setup: We consider a non-convex environment repre-
sented as a binary grid world populated with agents that aim
to cooperatively and as quickly as possible visit every cell.
The environment of size 24 × 24 is populated with N = 6
agents, each of which has a local ﬁeld of view of 16 × 16
pixels separated in two channels representing obstacles and
local coverage with a communication radius of rc = 16.
An overview of the environment can be seen in Fig. 7. The
agents’ communication topology changes over discrete time
as the agents move and interact with the environment (i.e.,
avoid obstacles).
2) Training/Architecture Extensions: We extend the ar-
chitecture described in [6] as follows both for the self-
interested (from now on referred to as non-cooperative) and
the cooperative policy: (i) replace the encoder with a VAE
that outputs a multivariate Gaussian (ii) add a local encoder
of the observation that skips the VAE and the GNN to the
ﬁnal action MLP (iii) add an MLP transforming the output of
the VAE before feeding it to the GNN (iv) add the conﬁdence

Fig. 7.
Coverage environment at two different time steps: Six agents
(blue and red squares) are placed in a randomly generated grid-world with
the goal to cover the free space (white) as quickly as possible. Agents can
communicate if they are within communication range rc (indicated as green
dashed lines). The red agent is non-cooperative with an adversarial (self-
interested) goal, i.e., to cover as much area as possible, non-cooperatively.
weighting mechanism that takes into consideration the VAE
Gaussian of all agents and generates attention weights for
the GNN layer. The training consists of the following steps:
First, we train the cooperative policy with the modiﬁed
architecture, but without training the VAE and GP. We use
this policy to train the VAE and GP independently from the
policy by collecting samples of observations and positions
of agents. We then train the cooperative policy from scratch
with the VAE parameters obtained in the previous step
while keeping the VAE parameters unchanged. This yields
a cooperative coverage policy that uses the VAE to encode
the local observations of each agent, which is shared through
the GNN with other agents.
During training, we assume full connectivity for the conﬁ-
dence weighting and compute the weights only for the non-
cooperative agent. This makes learning manipulative commu-
nications for the non-cooperative agents more difﬁcult and
therefore emphasizes the success of conﬁdence weighting.
During evaluation, we use the graph topology resulting from
the speciﬁed rc for the conﬁdence weighting. Similar as
described in Sec. VII-A, we penalize excessive deviation
from mC via a squared error loss.
3) Experiments: To demonstrate the effectiveness of con-
ﬁdence weighting, we consider three reference experiments.
First, we introduce a baseline policy (with N = 6) that ran-
domly moves an agent to a neighboring cell with preference
to uncovered cells, without making use of any communica-
tion to other agents.
Secondly, we consider training two different Cooperative
models with N = 6 and F = 0. Both models use the same
architecture, but the ﬁrst model is optimized without pre-
trained VAE, while the second model uses a pre-trained
VAE. This means that only the latter can be used with
conﬁdence weighting. We evaluate the latter with and without
conﬁdence weighting and with a drop-in median ﬁlter, for
which we replace the element-wise sum over neighbors in
(12) with a median over neighbors. The drop-in median ﬁlter
corresponds to an alternate (benchmark) message ﬁltering
strategy. Additionally, we also perform experiments without
any communication.
Lastly, we introduce a single non-cooperative agent so that
N = 6 and F = 1. We train three models, two that cover
the Naive case and one that covers the Omniscient case. For
the Naive case, we train similar to the adversarial of [6]
without conﬁdence weighting and evaluate with and without
conﬁdence weighting. Additionally, we train a model for the
Naive case with drop-in median. For the Omniscient case,
we train with conﬁdence weighting and evaluate with and
without conﬁdence weighting.
4) Metrics: For comparison, we consider the percentual
global coverage at two ﬁxed time steps t0 and t1, which
are, respectively, the number of steps an ideal policy would
require to cover the full area if all N = 6 agents cover a
cell at every time-step (t0), or if only a single agent covers
a cell at every time step (t1). We refer to the coverage
(either per-agent or total) at these time steps as p0 and p1,
respectively. Our experiments consider N = 6 agents in a
world of size 24 × 24 with 60% coverable space, therefore,
t0 = ⌈242·0.6
6
⌉= 58 and t1 = ⌈242·0.6
1
⌉= 345.
5) Results: We summarize the results of all coverage
experiments in Tab. III. This table separates different training
runs, as explained in Sec. VII-B.3, with two thin lines
or one thick vertical line and different evaluations of the
same training run with one thin vertical line. We highlight
the best results per experiment group (separated by thick
lines) in bold for the p0 and p1 performance both for
the cooperative agents and all agents together (higher is
better), and non-cooperative agents (lower is better). Fig. 8
compares the Naive and Omniscient case with and without
conﬁdence weighting. For the Naive case without conﬁdence
weighting, the non-cooperative agent covers 430% (p1) of
the area of an average cooperative agent. The total team
coverage performance drops to 64% of that of an entirely
cooperative team (p0). In contrast, when applying conﬁdence
weighting to the cooperative agents in the Naive case, the
non-cooperative agent manages to cover only 82% of the
area an average cooperative agent covers (p1) and the total
performance is at 92% of the Cooperative performance.
In the Omniscient case without conﬁdence weighting, the
non-cooperative agent covers 269% of the area of an average
cooperative agent, or 81% of the non-cooperative coverage
for the Naive case (p1). With applied conﬁdence weighting,
the performance is similar (i.e., it even drops slightly to 238%
and 72%, respectively), indicating that the non-cooperative
agent was not able to learn better adversarial communica-
tions, despite the fact that it was trained with knowledge of
the conﬁdence weighting. The total team coverage drops to
80% of that of an entirely cooperative team (p0).
Lastly, we compare the total performance of a subset
of trials of Tab. III in Fig. 9. The plots on the left side
compare the impact of conﬁdence weighting for the purely
Cooperative case without non-cooperative agents and with
drop-in median. The performance for the Cooperative case
trained without VAE is similar to trained with and evalu-
ated with and without conﬁdence weighting. This indicates
no negative impact of conﬁdence weighting to an entirely
cooperative team. In contrast, the drop-in median for the
Cooperative case performs at 71% of the cooperative trained
without VAE and therefore signiﬁcantly affects the coop-
erative performance. In the middle, we compare the total

25
50
75
100
Coverage %
t0
t1
Naive
t0
t1
w/o cw
Omniscient
100
200
300
Episode Time Steps
25
50
75
100
Coverage %
t0
t1
100
200
300
Episode Time Steps
t0
t1
w/ cw
Fig. 8. We show the impact of a single non-cooperative agent (F = 1) on a
cooperative team (N = 6) for the Naive case (left column) and Omniscient
case (right column) as area covered over episode time steps for 100 episodes
for the non-cooperative agent (red), mean of cooperative agents (blue) or
all agents (black) with a 1σ standard deviation over each individual agent.
The ﬁrst row shows the results without and the second row with applied
conﬁdence weighting (cw).
performance for the Naive case without conﬁdence weighting
to the Omniscient case with conﬁdence weighting. We see
that for the Naive case without conﬁdence weighting, the
performance is similar to the random baseline. In contrast,
the Omniscient case with conﬁdence weighting is at 124%
of the Naive case without conﬁdence weighting or random
baseline, indicating a noticeable boost of performance for
the cooperative objective to collectively cover the area de-
spite adversarial communications. The plot on the right side
compares the performance for the Naive case trained with
drop-in median to the Cooperative with drop-in median and
Cooperative without communication between agents. In the
Cooperative case, the drop-in median performs slightly better
than without communication, but signiﬁcantly worse than
any Cooperative case with communication. The Naive case
trained with drop-in median ﬁlter performs only slightly
better. While the median aggregation scheme ﬁlters out
adversarial messages, it also ﬁlters out most cooperative
messages and therefore causes the performance to drop.
The Naive case with drop-in median ﬁlter performs slightly
better since the non-cooperative agent can take this into
consideration and act greedily, in contrast to an average
cooperative agent.
VIII. DISCUSSION AND FURTHER WORK
Summary. In this paper we developed a two-stage proba-
bilistic model of agent observations consisting of a GP prior
over the latent vectors of a per-agent auto-encoder, following
the general AEVB framework [18]. By using the latent space
posteriors produced by the encoder as messages between
agents we thereby obtained a probabilistic model describing
the joint distribution over agent messages conditional on
their relative positions from the GP stage. This model of
messages allows us to formulate and compare hypotheses
regarding the generation mechanism for received messages,
in particular regarding which agents are being truthful, and
thereby assign conﬁdences to the messages received from
different neighbors. Having introduced a taxonomy of non-
cooperative agents according to their level of knowledge of
any countermeasures employed by the cooperative agents,
we integrated our conﬁdences into a GNN analogously to
attention weights in order to ﬁlter out potentially harmful
messages from non-cooperative neighbors.
Discussion. Our conﬁdence weighting method clearly
performs well against all adversaries considered that were
optimized with imperfect knowledge of it. In both of our
experiments we ﬁnd that it can easily detect the commu-
nication of adversaries, and, having done so, cause the
cooperative agents to disregard it and prevent substantial
harm to their individual performance. Indeed, in our second
experiment the remaining decrease in collective performance
relative to purely cooperative agents when using conﬁdence
weighting against a single Naive adversary is due to poor
performance of the adversary individually at achieving the
collective goal via its actions, rather than any effect it has
via communication.
We have seen that our method also has desirable per-
formance characteristics outside of this ideal set of sce-
narios, for example by having a negligible impact on the
performance of the cooperative agents if there is in fact
no adversary present. The performance in the presence of
an Omniscient adversary is more subtle but still impressive.
It is to be noted that no message ﬁltering strategy with a
negligible impact on purely cooperative agents can reliably
detect and ﬁlter out the communication of all possible
adversaries since a sufﬁciently capable adversary can pro-
duce communication which is arbitrarily similar to actual
cooperative communication if necessary. The strength of a
message ﬁltering strategy in the presence of a competent
Omniscient adversary therefore should be measured in terms
of the damage caused to the cooperative agents objective
by the strongest attack which can bypass it. This indirect
reduction in damage is clearly seen in both experiments,
with overall collective performance in the second experiment
being reduced by only 21% in an attack optimized against
our message ﬁltering strategy compared to 37% against no
ﬁltering. This effect was even stronger in the ﬁrst experiment,
where we observed worst case loss increases for the cooper-
ative agents of 29% with conﬁdence weighting as opposed
to at least 678% without.
We have also seen that our method compares favorably to
other alternatives which we have considered. In the case of
the alternative methods considered in the ﬁrst experiment,
our method is superior at suppressing the impact of a wider
range of adversaries, while, in the case of the median ﬁltering
based method considered in the second experiment, our
method has a far smaller negative impact on the performance
of the cooperative agents when there are no adversaries
present.
Further Work. Our choice of GP kernel function was cho-
sen to maximize expressiveness while being clearly station-
ary, but introduced some inconveniences in training due to
occasional invalid covariance matrices. These inconveniences
could be avoided if stationarity was not required (e.g. because
the agents had access to their absolute position), or by

0
50
100
150
200
250
300
Episode Time Step
25
50
75
100
Coverage %
t0
t1
F = 0 w/o VAE/GP
F = 0 drop-in Median
F = 0 w/o cw
F = 0 w/ cw
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
Episode Time Step
t0
t1
Random Baseline
F = 1 Naive w/o cw
F = 1 Omniscient w/ cw
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
Episode Time Step
t0
t1
F = 1 Naive
drop-in Median
F = 0 drop-in Median
F = 0 w/o comm
Fig. 9.
Coverage performance as globally covered area over episode time steps as a comparison of total (all agents) coverage performance for different
experiment as mean over 100 episodes. Left: We compare a cooperative model trained with a pre-trained VAE without and with active conﬁdence weighting
for all agents to a cooperative model with drop-in median. Middle: We compare the impact a single Naive and Omniscient agent (F = 1) has on a
cooperative team (N = 6) with and without conﬁdence weighting for the cooperative agents. Right: Lastly, we compare a cooperative model with drop-in
median Omniscient with conﬁdence weighting performs similar and Naive trained with drop-in median with and without communication perform similar.
TABLE III
SUMMARY OF ALL COVERAGE RESULTS. BEST RESULTS PER GROUP (BLOCK BETWEEN SOLID SEPARATORS) IN BOLD.
N = 6
All Cooperative (F = 0)
w/ one non-cooperative (F = 1)
Random
Baseline
w/o
VAE/GP
w/ VAE/GP
Naive
Naive w/
drop-in
Median
Omniscient
w/o
cw
w/
cw
drop-in
Median
w/o
comm
w/o
cw
w/
cw
w/o
cw
w/
cw
Cooperative
(per agent)
p0
7.4 ± 4
11.8 ± 3
12.0 ± 3
11.7 ± 3
8.5 ± 4
7.6 ± 5
5.8 ± 3
11.3 ± 3
8.4 ± 4
7.4 ± 3
8.3 ± 3
p1
16.0 ± 8
16.4 ± 4
16.4 ± 4
16.4 ± 4
16.4 ± 8
16.3 ± 8
10.0 ± 5
17.0 ± 5
14.4 ± 6
12.5 ± 6
13.4 ± 5
Non-
Cooperative
p0
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
15.7 ± 1
8.6 ± 3
14.0 ± 2
15.4 ± 1
15.1 ± 2
p1
43.1 ± 11
13.6 ± 5
26.3 ± 7
34.7 ± 6
31.0 ± 7
Total
p0
44.7 ± 9
70.8 ± 8
71.9 ± 7
70.4 ± 7
50.9 ± 10
45.9 ± 11
44.5 ± 10
64.9 ± 7
55.9 ± 8
52.6 ± 7
56.5 ± 7
enforcing this stationarity approximately, e.g. by randomly
translating the training data.
Our method would permit extensions to take advantage of
information which we have assumed (in Sec. II) to not be
available. Examples would include considering all previous
communication observed from neighboring agents for the
purpose of determining conﬁdence weights, or checking
for consistency between the behavior of other agents and
their claimed observations given that the cooperative policy
is known. Either of these extensions would substantially
reduce the strategies available to an Omniscient adversary
and further reduce the potential damage caused by such an
adversary.
APPENDIX I
WEIGHTING DETAILS
We have Q(Z|O; φ) and P(Z|X; ψ, h) and wish to com-
pare hypotheses h. O is the same for all hypotheses, though
it is unobserved. We compare log P(O|X; ψ, θ, h) via (8). It
can be seen that the third term is constant across hypotheses,
and we can calculate the second. The ﬁrst term is intractable,
but to the extent that DKL(Q(O|Z; φ)||P(Z|O; ψ, θ, h))
is approximately constant across hypotheses we can still
compare the various h. Making this assumption we obtain
the result
log P(O|X; ψ, θ, h) ≈
−DKL(Q(Z|O; φ)||P(Z|X; ψ, h)) + C
(18)
where C is constant across hypotheses h.
The assumption is most clearly justiﬁed for the H0
and H1 single-agent hypotheses, since Q(Z|O; φ) has been
optimized to minimize this term during training, with the
only difference in P(Z|O; ψ, θ, h) being the number of
points drawn from the GP on which to condition, which
Q(Z|O; φ) ignores anyway. It is less clearly justiﬁed for
H2, but this hypothesis is already fairly crude, being a
uniform distribution in latent space, and we ﬁnd that it still
gets assigned a high marginal likelihood relative to other
hypotheses in the case of extreme z values.
APPENDIX II
KERNEL FUNCTION IMPLEMENTATION
Let us consider a neighborhood of N agents, whose latent
spaces each have Z dimensions. We wish to deﬁne a kernel
function which produces N × Z dimensional covariance
matrices C describing the correlations of all of these latent
variables as a function of the relative positions of these N
agents. Let the indices i and j index over agents and the
indices k and l index over latent variables, that is, let cijkl
refer to the covariance of the kth and lth latent variables of
the ith and jth agents respectively.
Since we require our GP to be stationary, the Z dimen-
sional covariance submatrix cij will always be the same
if i = j. Since this is also the covariance matrix of the
latent variables of an individual agent considered alone, we
let these matrices equal γI similarly to a simple VAE. This
means that our N × Z covariance matrix now has the form,
shown here for N = 3:


γI
cT
01
cT
02
c01
γI
cT
12
c02
c12
γI


We wish to deﬁne the covariances of cij by a differentiable
function of relative position xij = xj −xi involving a neural
network. We also require that these covariances form a valid

covariance matrix for every pair of agents when combined
with the intra-agent covariances γI. We start by deﬁning
a NN function L(xij) from relative positions to 2Z × M
matrices, where M ≤2Z, parameterized as an MLP. LLT
is then guaranteed to be a valid 2Z dimensional covariance
matrix, whose submatrices we shall denote as
 tij
mT
ij
mij
bij

For every off-diagonal element tijkl, k ̸= l of tij which
is non-zero we can set it to zero by adding a matrix n
whose elements are deﬁned as npq = −mijkl if p = i
and q = j, npq = |mijkl| if p = q = i or p = q = j
and 0 otherwise. This process preserves the validity of the
overall 2Z dimensional matrix as a covariance matrix since
these matrices n are positive semi-deﬁnite. Likewise, we can
increase the values of each diagonal element of the modiﬁed
LLT to equal the maximum element of the diagonal while
retaining validity. We can thereby obtain a modiﬁed valid
2Z dimensional covariance matrix with the form
βijI
mT
ij
mij
βijI

for some value βij. We can explicitly calculate βij as βij =
max(βijt, βijb) where βijt = maxk
P
l |tijkl| and βijb =
maxk
P
l |bijkl| . This covariance matrix can now be made
compatible with the intra-agent covariance matrices of γI by
multiplying the result by
γ
βij , giving us:
cij = γ
βij
mij
(19)
This process guarantees that a C generated for any pair of
agents is a valid covariance matrix, and is dependent only on
relative position, but does not guarantee validity for N ≥3.
For this we rely on the trained function becoming valid for
almost all input once it converges while being trained on
pairs only, an effect which we do in fact observe. (To make
our method invariant in permutation of the agents, we take
the further step of symmetrizing and use 1
2(cij+cT
ji) in place
of just cij, where cT
ji is calculated similarly to cij but with
the relative position negated.)
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
We gratefully acknowledge the support of ARL grant
DCIST CRA W911NF-17-2-0181. A. Prorok was supported
by the Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council
(grant EP/S015493/1). J. Blumenkamp was supported in part
through an Amazon Research Award.
REFERENCES
[1] N. Hyldmar, Y. He, and A. Prorok, “A ﬂeet of miniature cars for
experiments in cooperative driving,” in 2019 International Conference
on Robotics and Automation (ICRA).
IEEE, 2019, pp. 3238–3244.
[2] D. T. Nguyen, A. Kumar, and H. C. Lau, “Credit assignment for
collective multiagent RL with global rewards,” in Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems, 2018, pp. 8102–8113.
[3] J.
D.
Bjerknes
and
A.
F.
T.
Winﬁeld,
On
Fault
Tolerance
and Scalability of Swarm Robotic Systems.
Berlin, Heidelberg:
Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2013, pp. 431–444. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-32723-0 31
[4] K. Saulnier, D. Salda˜na, A. Prorok, G. J. Pappas, and V. Kumar,
“Resilient ﬂocking for mobile robot teams,” IEEE Robotics and
Automation Letters, vol. 2, no. 2, pp. 1039–1046, 2017.
[5] S.
Gil,
S.
Kumar,
M.
Mazumder,
D.
Katabi,
and
D.
Rus,
“Guaranteeing spoof-resilient multi-robot networks,” Autonomous
Robots, vol. 41, no. 6, pp. 1383–1400, Aug 2017. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10514-017-9621-5
[6] J. Blumenkamp and A. Prorok, “The emergence of adversarial commu-
nication in multi-agent reinforcement learning,” Conference on Robot
Learning (CoRL), 2020.
[7] D. Dolev, M. J. Fischer, R. Fowler, N. A. Lynch, and H. Raymond
Strong, “An efﬁcient algorithm for byzantine agreement without
authentication,” Information and Control, vol. 52, no. 3, pp. 257 –
274, 1982. [Online]. Available: http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S0019995882907768
[8] V. Strobel, E. Castell´o Ferrer, and M. Dorigo, “Managing byzantine
robots via blockchain technology in a swarm robotics collective
decision making scenario,” in Proceedings of the 17th International
Conference on Autonomous Agents and MultiAgent Systems, ser. AA-
MAS ’18.
Richland, SC: International Foundation for Autonomous
Agents and Multiagent Systems, 2018, p. 541–549.
[9] J. Foerster, I. A. Assael, N. de Freitas, and S. Whiteson, “Learning
to communicate with deep multi-agent reinforcement learning,” in
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 29, D. D.
Lee, M. Sugiyama, U. V. Luxburg, I. Guyon, and R. Garnett,
Eds.
Curran Associates, Inc., 2016, pp. 2137–2145. [Online].
Available: http://papers.nips.cc/paper/6042-learning-to-communicate-
with-deep-multi-agent-reinforcement-learning.pdf
[10] Q. Li, F. Gama, A. Ribeiro, and A. Prorok, “Graph neural networks
for decentralized multi-robot path planning,” IEEE/RSJ International
Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS), 2020.
[11] E. Tolstaya, F. Gama, J. Paulos, G. Pappas, V. Kumar, and
A. Ribeiro, “Learning decentralized controllers for robot swarms
with graph neural networks,” in Proceedings of the Conference on
Robot Learning, ser. Proceedings of Machine Learning Research,
L. P. Kaelbling, D. Kragic, and K. Sugiura, Eds., vol. 100.
PMLR, 30 Oct–01 Nov 2020, pp. 671–682. [Online]. Available:
http://proceedings.mlr.press/v100/tolstaya20a.html
[12] A. Khan, E. Tolstaya, A. Ribeiro, and V. Kumar, “Graph policy
gradients for large scale robot control,” in Proceedings of the
Conference on Robot Learning, ser. Proceedings of Machine Learning
Research, L. P. Kaelbling, D. Kragic, and K. Sugiura, Eds., vol. 100.
PMLR, 30 Oct–01 Nov 2020, pp. 823–834. [Online]. Available:
http://proceedings.mlr.press/v100/khan20a.html
[13] C. Richter and N. Roy, “Safe visual navigation via deep learning and
novelty detection,” Robotics: Science and Systems XIII, Jul 2017.
[14] M. Soelch, J. Bayer, M. Ludersdorfer, and P. van der Smagt, “Vari-
ational inference for on-line anomaly detection in high-dimensional
time series,” 2016.
[15] L. V. Utkin, V. S. Zaborovskii, and S. G. Popov, “Detection
of
anomalous
behavior
in
a
robot
system
based
on
deep
learning elements,” Automatic Control and Computer Sciences,
vol. 50, no. 8, pp. 726–733, Dec 2016. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.3103/S0146411616080319
[16] M. Ribeiro, A. E. Lazzaretti, and H. S. Lopes, “A study of deep
convolutional auto-encoders for anomaly detection in videos,” Pattern
Recognition Letters, vol. 105, pp. 13 – 22, 2018, machine Learning
and
Applications in
Artiﬁcial
Intelligence. [Online].
Available:
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0167865517302489
[17] X.
Wang,
Y.
Du,
S.
Lin,
P.
Cui,
Y.
Shen,
and
Y.
Yang,
“adVAE: A self-adversarial variational autoencoder with gaussian
anomaly
prior
knowledge
for
anomaly
detection,”
Knowledge-
Based Systems, vol. 190, p. 105187, 2020. [Online]. Available:
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0950705119305283
[18] D. P. Kingma and M. Welling, “Auto-encoding variational bayes,”
Proceedings of the 2nd International Conference on Learning Rep-
resentations (ICLR), 2014.
[19] P. Veliˇckovi´c, G. Cucurull, A. Casanova, A. Romero, P. Li`o, and
Y. Bengio, “Graph Attention Networks,” International Conference
on Learning Representations, 2018, accepted as poster. [Online].
Available: https://openreview.net/forum?id=rJXMpikCZ
[20] L. Guerrero-Bonilla, A. Prorok, and V. Kumar, “Formations for
resilient robot teams,” IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters, vol. 2,
no. 2, pp. 841–848, 2017.
[21] D. Salda˜na, A. Prorok, S. Sundaram, M. F. M. Campos, and V. Kumar,
“Resilient consensus for time-varying networks of dynamic agents,”
in 2017 American Control Conference (ACC), 2017, pp. 252–258.

[22] J. Usevitch and D. Panagou, “r-robustness and (r, s)-robustness of
circulant graphs,” in 2017 IEEE 56th Annual Conference on Decision
and Control (CDC), 2017, pp. 4416–4421.
[23] L. Guerrero-Bonilla, D. Salda˜na, and V. Kumar, “Dense r-robust
formations on lattices,” in 2020 IEEE International Conference on
Robotics and Automation (ICRA), 2020, pp. 6633–6639.
[24] M. A. Fischler and R. C. Bolles, “Random sample consensus:
A paradigm for model ﬁtting with applications to image analysis
and automated cartography,” Commun. ACM, vol. 24, no. 6, p.
381–395, June 1981. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/
358669.358692
[25] P. Antonante, V. Tzoumas, H. Yang, and L. Carlone, “Outlier-robust
estimation: Hardness, minimally-tuned algorithms, and applications,”
2020.
[26] H. Yang, P. Antonante, V. Tzoumas, and L. Carlone, “Graduated
non-convexity for robust spatial perception: From non-minimal
solvers to global outlier rejection,” IEEE Robotics and Automation
Letters, vol. 5, no. 2, p. 1127–1134, Apr 2020. [Online]. Available:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/LRA.2020.2965893
[27] B. Schlotfeldt, V. Tzoumas, D. Thakur, and G. J. Pappas, “Resilient
active information gathering with mobile robots,” in 2018 IEEE/RSJ
International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS),
2018, pp. 4309–4316.
[28] L. Zhou, V. Tzoumas, G. J. Pappas, and P. Tokekar, “Distributed
attack-robust submodular maximization for multi-robot planning,” in
2020 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation
(ICRA), 2020, pp. 2479–2485.
[29] V. Renganathan and T. Summers, “Spoof resilient coordination for
distributed multi-robot systems,” in 2017 International Symposium on
Multi-Robot and Multi-Agent Systems (MRS), 2017, pp. 135–141.
[30] M. Porter, S. Dey, A. Joshi, P. Hespanhol, A. Aswani, M. Johnson-
Roberson, and R. Vasudevan, “Detecting deception attacks on au-
tonomous vehicles via linear time-varying dynamic watermarking,”
in IEEE Conference on Control Technology and Applications, 2020,
accepted.
[31] F. Gama, E. Isuﬁ, G. Leus, and A. Ribeiro, “Graphs, convolutions, and
neural networks: From graph ﬁlters to graph neural networks,” IEEE
Signal Processing Magazine, vol. 37, no. 6, pp. 128–138, 2020.
[32] F. P. Casale, A. Dalca, L. Saglietti, J. Listgarten, and N. Fusi,
“Gaussian process prior variational autoencoders,” in Advances
in
Neural
Information
Processing
Systems
31,
S.
Bengio,
H.
Wallach,
H.
Larochelle,
K.
Grauman,
N.
Cesa-Bianchi,
and
R.
Garnett,
Eds.
Curran
Associates,
Inc.,
2018,
pp.
10 369–10 380. [Online]. Available: http://papers.nips.cc/paper/8238-
gaussian-process-prior-variational-autoencoders.pdf
[33] I. Higgins, L. Matthey, A. Pal, C. Burgess, X. Glorot, M. Botvinick,
S. Mohamed, and A. Lerchner, “beta-vae: Learning basic visual
concepts with a constrained variational framework,” Proceedings of
the 5th International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR),
2017.
