Communication-robust multi-agent learning by adaptable
auxiliary multi-agent adversary generation
Lei YUAN1,2*, Feng CHEN1*, Zongzhang ZHANG1, Yang YU (✉)1,2
1   National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, Nanjing 210023, China
2   Polixir Technologies, Nanjing 211106, China
 The Author(s) 2023. This article is published with open access at link.springer.com and journal.hep.com.cn
 
Abstract    Communication  can  promote  coordination  in
cooperative  Multi-Agent  Reinforcement  Learning  (MARL).
Nowadays,  existing  works  mainly  focus  on  improving  the
communication efficiency of agents, neglecting that real-world
communication  is  much  more  challenging  as  there  may  exist
noise  or  potential  attackers.  Thus  the  robustness  of  the
communication-based policies becomes an emergent and severe
issue that needs more exploration. In this paper, we posit that
the ego system1) trained with auxiliary adversaries may handle
this limitation and propose an adaptable method of Multi-Agent
Auxiliary Adversaries  Generation  for  robust Communication,
dubbed MA3C, to obtain a robust communication-based policy.
In specific, we introduce a novel message-attacking approach
that  models  the  learning  of  the  auxiliary  attacker  as  a
cooperative  problem  under  a  shared  goal  to  minimize  the
coordination  ability  of  the  ego  system,  with  which  every
information channel may suffer from distinct message attacks.
Furthermore,  as  naive  adversarial  training  may  impede  the
generalization ability of the ego system, we design an attacker
population generation approach based on evolutionary learning.
Finally,  the  ego  system  is  paired  with  an  attacker  population
and then alternatively trained against the continuously evolving
attackers to improve its robustness, meaning that both the ego
system and the attackers are adaptable. Extensive experiments
on  multiple  benchmarks  indicate  that  our  proposed  MA3C
provides  comparable  or  better  robustness  and  generalization
ability than other baselines.
Keywords    multi-agent communication, adversarial training,
robustness validation, reinforcement learning
 1    Introduction
Communication  plays  a  crucial  role  in  Multi-Agent
Reinforcement Learning (MARL) [1], with which agents can
share  information  such  as  experiences,  intentions,  or
observations  among  teammates  to  facilitate  the  learning
process, leading to a better understanding of other agents (or
other  environmental  elements)  and  better  coordination  as  a
result.  Previous  works  mainly  concentrate  on  improving
communication  efficiency  from  multiple  aspects,  either  by
applying (designing) efficient communication protocols [2−5],
or  combining  the  nature  of  multi-agent  systems  to  promote
communication
 [6−8],
 etc,
 and
 have
 been
 widely
demonstrated  to  alleviate  the  partial  observability  caused  by
the nature of the environment or the non-stationary caused by
the simultaneous learning of multiple agents in a multi-agent
system, achieving remarkable coordination for a wide range of
tasks  like  StarCraft  Multi-Agent  Challenge  (SMAC)  [8].
However,  the  mainstream  communication  methods  are  still
difficult  to  be  applied  in  the  real  world,  as  these  methods
popularly  assume  the  policies  are  trained  and  tested  in  a
similar  or  identical  environment,  seldom  considering  the
policy drift led by noise or hostile attacks in the environment.
Let’s  review  the  numerous  successes  achieved  in  modern
Reinforcement  Learning  (RL).  Most  approaches  depend
highly on deep neural networks, which are, however, shown to
be  vulnerable  to  any  adversarial  attacks  [9],  i.e.,  any  slight
perturbation  in  the  input  may  lead  to  entirely  different
decision-making  of  a  Deep  Reinforcement  Learning  (DRL)
agent [10]. This poses a significant risk to the application of
most  DRL  algorithms,  including  MARL  communication
algorithms,  because  the  noise  or  hostile  attacks  in  the
environment can cause the system to crash. Thus, improving
the  robustness  of  the  decision  system,  which  means  that  we
hope the system still works well when attacked, is an emergent
and severe issue. For the mentioned problem in a single-agent
system,  many  efficient  methods  are  proposed,  including
adversarial  regularizers  designing  [11,12].  They  enjoy
theoretical  robustness  guarantee,  but  with  limited  robustness
ability  [13].  On  the  other  hand,  other  approaches  introduce
auxiliary  adversaries  to  promote  robustness  via  adversarial
training,  model  the  training  process  from  a  game  theory
 
Received December 3, 2022; accepted June 18, 2023
E-mail: yuy@nju.edu.cn
* These authors contributed equally to this work.
Front. Comput. Sci., 2024, 18(6): 186331
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11704-023-2733-5
RESEARCH ARTICLE
1) Here ego system means the multi-agent communication system itself. We use the word ego to distinguish it from the generated adversaries.

N
N ×(N −1)
perspective to gain the worst-case performance guarantee and
show  high  effectiveness  in  different  domains  [14,15].  As  a
consequence,  the  MARL  community  also  investigates  the
robustness  of  a  multi-agent  system  from  various  aspects,
including  the  uncertainty  in  local  observation  [16],  model
function  [15],  action  making  [17],  etc.  However,  the
communication process in MARL is much more complex. For
instance, if we consider a fully connected multi-agent with 
agents,  there  are  total 
 message  channels.  If  we
train  an  adversary  to  attack  these  channels,  the  attacker’s
action  space  may  grow  dramatically  with  the  number  of
agents. Previous works make strong assumptions to alleviate
this problem, such as some default channels suffering from the
same message perturbation [18] or only a limited number of
agents  sustaining  some  heuristic  noise  injection.  Despite  the
difficulty of considering the communication robustness of the
multi-agent  system,  it  is  an  important  topic  because  the
communication channels are likely to be under noise or hostile
attacks  in  some  application  scenarios.  This  current  state
motivates us to design reasonable approaches to improve the
robustness  of  the  communication  system  when  message
attacks are possible in the environment.
N −1
N
In  this  work,  we  take  a  further  step  towards  achieving
robustness in MARL communication via auxiliary adversarial
training.  We  posit  a  robust  communication-based  policy
should  be  robust  to  scenarios  where every message  channel
may  be  perturbed  under different degrees  at any  time.
Specifically, we model the message adversary training process
as  a  cooperative  MARL  problem,  where  each  adversary
obtains  the  local  state  of  one  message  sender,  then  outputs
 stochastic  actions  as  message  perturbations  for  each
message to be sent to other teammates. For the optimization of
the  adversary,  as  there  are 
 adversaries  coordinating  to
minimize the ego system’s return, we can use any cooperative
MARL  approach  to  train  the  attacker  system.  Moreover,  to
alleviate  the  overfitting  problem  of  using  a  single  attacker
[19], we introduce an attacker population learning paradigm,
with which we can obtain a set of attackers with high attacking
quality  and  behavior  diversity.  The  ego  system  and  the
attacker  are  then  trained  in  an  alternative  way  to  obtain  a
robust  communication-based  policy.  Extensive  experiments
are conducted on various cooperative multi-agent benchmarks
that need communication to coordination, including Hallway
[20],  two  maps  from  StarCraft  Multi-Agent  Challenge
(SMAC)  [20],  a  newly  created  environment  Gold  Panner
(GP), and Traffic Junction (TJ) [21]. The experimental results
show  that  MA3C  outperforms  multiple  baselines.  Further,
more results validate it from other aspects, like generalization
and high transfer ability for complex tasks.
 2    Related work
Multi-agent communication Communication is a significant
topic  in  MARL  under  partial  observability,  which  typically
studies when to send what messages to whom [1]. The early
relevant  works  mainly  consider  combining  communication
with  any  existing  MARL  methods,  using  broadcasted
messages  to  promote  coordination  within  a  team  [6]  or
designing  end-to-end  training  paradigms  that  update  the
message network and policy network together with the back-
propagated  gradients  [22].  To  improve  communication  in
complex  scenarios,  researchers  investigate  the  efficiency  of
communication from multiple aspects like designing positive
listening
 protocol
 [23,24].
 To
 avoid
 redundant
communication, some works employ techniques such as gate
mechanisms [2,4,25] to decide whom to communicate with, or
attention mechanisms [5,21,26,27] to extract the most valuable
part  from  multiple  received  messages  for  decision-making.
What content to share is also a critical point. A direct practice
is to only share local observations or their embeddings [6,20],
but it inevitably causes bandwidth wasting or even degrades
the coordination efficiency. Some methods utilize techniques
like  teammate  modeling  to  generate  more  succinct  and
efficient  messages  [8,28,29].  Besides,  VBC  [28]  and  TMC
[29]  also  answer  the  question  of  when  to  communicate  by
utilizing  a  fixed  threshold  to  control  the  chance  of
communication. In terms of the robustness of communication
in cooperative MARL, [30] filters valuable content from noisy
messages  by  Gaussian  process  modeling.  AME  [31]  utilizes
an ensemble-based defense method to reach robustness but it
only assumes no more than half of the message channels in the
system  can  be  attacked.  [18]  considers  the  communication
robustness  in  situations  where  one  agent  in  the  cooperating
group  is  taken  over  by  a  learned  adversary,  and  then  the
policy-search response-oracle (PSRO) technique is applied.
Robustness  in  cooperative  MARL Previous  cooperative
MARL  [32]  works  either  concentrate  on  improving
coordination ability from diverse aspects like scalability [33],
credit assignment [34], and non-stationarity [35], or applying
the  cooperative  MARL  technique  to  multiple  domains  like
autonomous vehicle teams [36,37], power management [38],
and dynamic algorithm configuration [39]. Those approaches
ignore the robustness of the learned policy when encountering
uncertainties,  perturbations,  or  structural  changes  in  the
environment [10], hastening the robustness test in the MARL
[40]. For the altering of the opponent policy, M3DDPG [41]
learns  a  minimax  variant  of  MADDPG  [42]  and  trains  the
MARL  policy  in  an  adversarial  way,  showing  potential  in
solving  the  problem  of  poor  local  optima  compared  with
multiple  baselines.  [43]  applies  the  social  empowerment
technique  to  avoid  the  MARL  overfitting  to  their  specific
trained  partners.  As  for  the  uncertainty  caused  by  the
inaccurate  knowledge  of  the  MARL  dynamic  model,  R-
MADDPG  [44]  proposes  the  concept  of  robust  Nash
equilibrium, treats the uncertainty of environment as a natural
agent,  and  exhibits  superiority  when  encountering  reward
uncertainty. Consider the observation perturbation, [16] learns
an adversarial observation policy to attack one participant in a
cooperative
 MARL
 system,
 demonstrating
 the
 high
vulnerability  of  cooperative  MARL  facing  observation
perturbation. For the action robustness in cooperative MARL,
ARTS [45] and RADAR [46] learn resilient MARL policies
via  adversarial  value  decomposition.  [17]  further  designs  an
action  regularizer  to  attack  the  cooperative  MARL  system
efficiently.
Population-based
 reinforcement
 learning
 (PBRL)
Population-Based  Training  (PBT)  has  been  widely  used  in
2
Front. Comput. Sci., 2024, 18(6): 186331

machine  learning  and  made  tremendous  success  in  different
domains  [47],  which  also  reveals  great  potential  for
reinforcement  learning  problems  [48,49].  One  successful
application of PBRL is to train multiple policies to generate
diverse  behaviors  that  can  accelerate  the  learning  of
downstream  tasks  [50].  Another  category  focus  on  applying
population  training  to  facilitate  reinforcement  learning  in
aspects  like  efficient  exploration  [51],  model  learning  [52],
robustness  [19],  and  zero-shot  coordination  [53,54].  Among
all  these  works,  [19]  is  most  similar  to  our  work,  which
maintains  a  population  with  different  individuals  by  the
different  network  initialization,  without  an  explicit  diversity
constraint  among  individuals.  However,  our  work  differs
because  we  further  consider  the  robustness  of  multi-agent
communication  beyond  the  single-agent  RL  setting,  and  we
explicitly  optimize  the  diversity  of  the  attacker  population.
Actually, if all individuals act indistinctively, the population is
just  multiple  copies  of  an  individual,  so  one  key  factor  in
population-based training is to evaluate individuals effectively
and  ensure  their  differences.  One  series  of  representative
algorithms  is  evolutionary  computation  [51,55],  and  among
them the Quality-Diversity (QD) algorithms [56,57] have been
widely  used  to  obtain  high-quality  solutions  with  diverse
behaviors  in  a  single  run.  High-quality  refers  to  each
individual trying to accomplish the given task, while diversity
means  all  individuals  behave  differently  as  possible.  These
methods obtain great success in diverse domains such as skill
learning  [58],  multi-object  optimization  [59],  and  skill
discovering [60]. Nevertheless, multi-agent problems such as
SMAC  [61]  are  much  more  complex,  as  how  to  distinguish
agents’ cooperation  patterns  and  measure  distances  between
different joint policies are still open questions.
 3    Problem setting
⟨I,S,A,P,Ω,O,R,γ⟩
I = {1,2,...,N}
N
γ ∈[0,1)
i
oi ∈Ω
s ∈S
oi = O(s,i)
ai ∈A
a ∈AN
s′ ∼P(s′|s, a)
r = R(s, a)
M
πi (ai | τi,mi)
τi
(
o1
i ,a1
i ,...,ot−1
i
,at−1
i
,ot
i
)
i
mi ∈M
i
mi j
j
i
i
m:i = msgi(oi)
msgi(·)
i
This paper considers the problem setting of fully cooperative
MARL  which  can  be  modeled  as  a  Decentralized  Partially
Observable  Markov  Decision  Process  (Dec-POMDP)  [62]
consisting
 of
 a
 tuple 
,
 where
 indicates  the  finite  set  of 
 agents  and
 is the discounted factor. At each timestep, each agent
 observes a local observation 
, which is a projection of
the  true  state 
 by  the  observation  function 
.
Each  agent  selects  an  action 
 to  execute,  and  all
individual actions form a joint action 
 which leads to
the next state 
 and a reward 
. Besides,
a  message  set 
 is  introduced  to  model  the  agent
communication, and the Dec-POMDP can be transformed into
a  Dec-POMDP  with  Communication  (Dec-POMDP-Comm)
[18].  Specifically,  each  agent  makes  decision  based  on  an
individual policy 
, where  represents the history
 of  agent , 
 is  the  message
received by agent  and 
 indicates the message sent from
agent  to . As each agent can behave as a message sender
and receiver, this paper uses the default message generator and
message  processor  for  various  methods  like  NDQ  [20].
Specifically,  the  messages  sent  by  agent  are  denoted  as
, where 
 indicates the message generator
of  agent .  It  focuses  on  obtaining  a  robust  policy  via
adversarial training for different message perturbations.
ˆπ
m
ˆm
i
πi(ai|τi, ˆmi)
ˆπ
To  conduct  the  adversarial  training,  we  aim  to  learn
auxiliary  message  adversaries  which  perturb  the  messages
received  by  each  agent,  transforming 
 into 
.  Thus,  each
agent  actually takes action by 
. Specifically, we
apply additive perturbations and  is defined as a deterministic
policy, which means that:
 
ξ = ˆπ(o), ˆm = m+ξ,
o
o = (o1,o2,...,on)
ˆπ = (ˆπ1,..., ˆπN)
oi
B
B
p
B = { ˆm | ∥m−ˆm∥p = ϵ}
ϵ
p
where 
 is  the  joint  observation  of  all  agents,  i.e.,
.  In  practice,  we  consider  decentralized
attack  policy,  where 
 with  each  sub-policy
taking  the  local  observation 
 as  input.  More  details  are
described  in  Section  4.1.  Besides,  arbitrary  perturbations
without  bounds  can  have  a  devastating  impact  on  the
communication  performance,  and  robustness  under  this
situation  is  almost  impossible.  Hence  to  consider  a  more
realistic  setting,  we  restrict  the  power  of  adversaries  and
constrain the perturbed messages to a set 
. For example, we
can typically define 
 as a -norm ball centered around the
original messages, i.e., 
, where  is the
given perturbation magnitude and  is the norm type.
Q(τ, a;ψ)
ψ
D
⟨τ, a,r,τ′⟩
Q(τ, a;ψ)
Q(s, a)
ψ
Finally, we optimize the ego-system policy by value-based
MARL  method,  where  deep  Q-learning  [63]  implements  the
action-value  function  with  a  deep  neural  network 
parameterized  by 
.  This  paper  follows  the  Centralized
Training and Decentralized Execution (CTDE) [64] paradigm.
In the centralized training phase, it uses a replay memory 
 to
store  the  transition  tuple 
.  We  use 
 to
approximate 
 to  alleviate  the  partial  observability.
Thus, the parameters  are learnt by minimizing the expected
Temporal Difference (TD) error:
 
L(ψ) = E(τ,a,r,τ′)∈D
[(r +γV (τ′;ψ−)−Q(τ, a;ψ))2]
,
V (τ′;ψ−) = maxa′ Q(τ′, a′;ψ−)
ψ−
ψ
Q(τ, a;ψ)
Q(τ, a;ψ)
N
Qi
i
where 
 is  the  expected  future
return  of  the  TD  target  and 
 are  parameters  of  the  target
network, which will be periodically updated with . Note that
though  we  follow  the  CTDE  paradigm,  multi-agent
communication  is  allowed  in  the  execution  process,  which
means that the inputs to the individual Q-networks are agents’
local observations and the received information. More specific
details  about  the  design  of 
 are  related  to  the
corresponding
 underlying
 multi-agent
 communication
methods.  Such  as  in  the  Full-Comm  algorithm  [5]  where
agents  broadcast  their  individual  observations, 
 is
decomposed  of  a  mixing  network  and 
 individual Q-
networks,  where  each 
 is  conditioned  on  both  agent ’s
observation and received messages.
 4    Method
In  this  section,  we  will  describe  the  detailed  design  of  our
proposed  method  named  MA3C.  Firstly,  we  show  how  to
model message adversaries as a cooperative multi-agent attack
problem  and  how  to  learn  a  specific  attacker  instance.
Immediately  after,  we  introduce  the  concept  of  attacker
population and our diversity mechanism that helps obtain an
auxiliary  attacker  population  with  diverse  and  qualified
attacker instances. Finally, a complete training description of
our approach is provided.
Lei YUAN et al.    Communication-robust multi-agent learning by adaptable auxiliary multi-agent adversary generation
3

 4.1    Message channel level attacking
To  achieve  robust  communication  for  a  multi-agent  system,
we  propose  to  train  the  ego  system  policy  under  possible
communication  channel  attacks,  thus  consequently  obtaining
an  attack-robust  communication-based  policy.  Generally,  we
aim to design an adversarial framework that consists of two
main-body  components,  which  are  respectively  the attacker
and ego system (c.f. Fig. 1). Specifically, the attacker aims to
produce  perturbation  on  the  communication  channels  to
degrade the communication performance of the ego system. In
contrast,  the  ego  system  can  be  any  MARL  methods  with
communication,  aiming  at  maximizing  coordination  ability.
The core idea is that adversarial training helps the ego system
encounter different message perturbation situations and learn
how  to  handle  possible  communication  attacks  to  achieve
robust  communication.  To  serve  this  goal,  one  critical
question is how to build a qualified attacker.
To answer the mentioned question, we claim that a qualified
attacker ought to have two vital properties - comprehensiven-
ess and specificity. Mostly, every agent plays a different role
in a multi-agent system, and each communication channel is
of different importance to the whole communication system.
In  most  cases,  a  portion  of  the  message  channels  are  more
important, and perturbing these message channels is the key to
achieving a practical attack. The referred comprehensiveness
means  that  the  attacker  should  consider  all  communication
message  channels  to  avoid  only  perturbing  some  specific  or
even
 useless
 messages,
 but
 overlooking
 those
 vital
individuals,  leading  to  low  robustness.  On  the  other  hand,
since  different  agents  process  the  received  messages  in
different ways in general, a reasonable perspective is that the
attacker  should  be  distinct  in  how  it  perturbs  the  messages
received by each agent, which we call specificity.
ˆR = −R
Except  for  these  two  important  properties,  one  more
fundamental requirement for the attacker is that it should act
sequentially to degrade the performance of the ego system. To
serve this goal, we model the attacking process as a sequential
decision  problem.  Specifically,  the  reward  is  defined  as  the
opposite of the ego system’s reward: 
, and the learning
objective is to maximize:
 
E

∞
∑
t=0
γt ˆR
= E
[
−
∞
∑
t=0
γtR
(
st, ˆat)st+1 ∼P
(
·|st, ˆat)
,
ˆat
i ∼πi
(
· | ot
i, ˆmt
i
)
, ˆmt
i = mt
i +ξt
i,
mt
:i = msgi
(
ot
i
)
,ξt = ˆπ(st)
]
.
(1)
N ×(N −1)×dcomm
N
N ×(N −1)
dcomm
attacker
N ×(N −1)×dcomm
Note  that  to  equip  the  attacker  with  the  properties  of
comprehensiveness and specificity,  we  model  the  action
space  as  a  continuous  action  space  with  dimension  of
,  where 
 denotes  the  number  of  agents,
 is the total number of the communication channels
and 
 indicates the dimension of one single message. At
each time step, the 
 should learn to output an action
with  dimension  of 
 which  serves  as  the
perturbation on the communication messages:
 
ξt = ˆπ(st), ξt ∈RN×(N−1)×dcomm,
ˆmt
i j = mt
i j +ξt
ij, i , j ∈{1,2,...,N}.
(2)
However, this design leads to a large action space, especially
when there exist quite many agents in the environment since
the  action  dimension  grows  squarely  with  the  number  of
agents.  The  problem  of  large  action  space  is  likely  to  bring
difficulties  to  the  attack  policy  learning,  which  has  already
been discussed before [33,65]. In fact, some modern MARL
algorithms like QMIX [66], decompose the joint action space
and  alleviate  the  difficulties  posed  by  the  large  joint  action
space in policy learning. Motivated by this point, we propose
to apply cooperative MARL methods to mitigate the problem
of large action space in attack policy learning.
N
N ×(N −1)
N
N −1
(N −1)∗dcomm
N
i
i
i
i
i
N
N
Specifically,  we  construct 
 virtual  agents,  divide  the
 communication  channels  into 
 groups  and  let
each  virtual  agent  be  responsible  for  the  attacks  on 
communication channels. In other words, the action dimension
for each virtual agent is 
, which grows linearly
with the number of agents, and these 
 virtual agents together
form a concept of attacker. As shown in Fig. 1, the th virtual
agent takes the individual observation of agent  as the input
into its policy. The policy’s output is the perturbation on the
sent information from agent , i.e., virtual agent  undertakes
the responsibility of contaminating the messages sent by the
th agent. In this way, we can think that these 
 virtual agents
cooperate  to  attack  the  underlying  communication  system
effectively. The whole process of adversarial training can be
seen as a confrontation between two groups of agents; one is
the  group  of  these 
 virtual  agents,  and  the  other  is  the
underlying multi-agent system (the ego system). In particular,
our  approach  can  be  applied  to  any  off-the-self  MARL
algorithm  that  can  handle  problems  with  continuous  action
spaces.
i
oi
i
ˆπi(ξi|oi;θ)
N −1
i
θ
mi j +ξij
In practice, adversary  (the virtual agent mentioned above)
uses the current observation  of agent , then learns an attack
policy 
 to perturb the 
 messages sent by agent ,
where  denotes  the  parameters  of  the  total  attacker  model.
Thus  each  message  equals  to 
.  We  here  can  employ
any  actor-critic  method  to  optimize  the  policy.  However,  in
the MARL system, there exists only a shared reward; thus, the
simplest way is to use a central critic similar to COMA [67] to
 
 
Fig. 1    The overall relationship between the attacker and the ego system. The
black  solid  arrows  indicate  the  direction  of  data  flow,  the  red  solid  ones
indicate the direction of gradient flow and the red dotted ones mean the attack
actions from the attacker onto specific communication channels
 
4
Front. Comput. Sci., 2024, 18(6): 186331

(s,ξ)
Q(s,ξ)
optimize  it.  It  takes 
 as  input  and  outputs  the  Q  value
.  Specifically,  we  extend  TD3  [68]  to  multi-agent
setting,  named  MATD3,  where  the  centralized  Q-function  is
learned with
 
argmin
θ
2
∑
j=1
∑
t
(
Q j
(
st,ξt
1,...,ξt
N
)
−yt)2 , j ∈{1,2},
yt = E
[
rt +γ min
j=1,2Q′
j
(
st, ˆπ1(ot+1
i
),..., ˆπN(ot+1
N )
)]
,
(3)
Q1,Q2
Q′
j
Q j
where  we  maintain  two Q-networks 
,  and 
 is  the
target  network  for 
.  The  actors  are  optimized  via  the
deterministic policy gradient:
 
∇θJ = E
[
∇θ ˆπi (ξi|oi)∇ξiQ1 (s,ξ1,...,ξN)
]
.
(4)
 4.2    Attacker population optimization
Many  previous  adversarial  algorithms  for  reinforcement
learning  typically  build  one  attacker  and  alternatively  do
adversarial  training  via  finding  a  Nash  equilibrium  solution.
However, one often criticized issue is that the ego system is
largely over-fitted to the corresponding attacker and may fail
to obtain good performance in practice. One possible solution
to this issue is constructing an attacker population instead of
one single attacker. By forcing the ego system to perform well
against all attackers in the population, we expect to impede the
ego system from over-fitting to one specific pattern and help it
achieve  good  performance  in  the  average  sense.  We  believe
this  practice  can  effectively  help  avoid  some  crash  cases,
which is consistent with the goal of robustness.
Besides,  one  natural  idea  is  that  the  adversarial  training
population should be diverse enough to cover attackers with
quite  different  patterns,  thus  avoiding  the  population
degenerating  into  one  single  attacker.  This  requires  that  we
train the ego system along with the learned attacker population
as:
 
argmax
π
J (π|P) = 1
|P|
∑
ˆπ∈P
J (π|ˆπ),
J (π|ˆπ) = E
[ ∞
∑
t=0
γtR
(
st, ˆat)st+1 ∼P
(
·|st, ˆat)
,
ˆat
i ∼πi
(
· | ot
i, ˆmt
i
)
, ˆmt
i = mt
i +ξt
i,
mt
:i = msgi
(
ot
i
)
,ξt = ˆπ(st)
]
,
Distance(ˆπi, ˆπj) > ϵ, ∀ˆπi, ˆπ j ∈P,
(5)
ˆπj ∈P
Distance(ˆπi, ˆπj)
i
j
Distance
where 
 means we sample an attacker from the learned
population during the training process, and 
refers  to  the  distance  between  attacker  and  attacker 
.
Nevertheless,  the  remaining  question  is  how  to  define  the
 function. Some previous population-based methods
[51,55]  typically  achieve  a  balance  between  the  quality  and
diversity  by  utilizing  the  mean  action  vector  as  an
identification  for  each  instance.  However,  these  practices
usually  require  a  well-defined  behavioral  descriptor  [69],
which is sometimes the prior knowledge about some critical
states and has demonstrated even hard in MARL setting [70].
j
m
j
zj
To  reach  the  mentioned  goal,  firstly,  we  observe  that  the
differences  in  attack  patterns  can  be  well  revealed  in  the
behaviors  of  the  attacked  ego  system.  The  basic  idea  is  that
when  under  different  types  of  communication  attacks,  the
multi-agent  system  may  exhibit  different  behaviors,  e.g.,
generating quite different trajectories. Based on this idea, for
each  attacker ,  we  sample 
 trajectories  of  the  ego  system
under the communication attacks of attacker , and utilize a
trajectory encoder to encode them into a representation 
:
 
zj = 1
m
m
∑
k=1
f enc
ϕ
(τk
j),
(6)
f enc
ϕ
ϕ
zj
j
zi
zj
where 
 denotes  a  trajectory  encoder  network  which  is
parameterized by . Then we utilize the representation 
 as
the  identification  for  attacker ,  and  the  distance  between 
and 
 describes how different these two attackers are.
zj
j
Lforward
zj
st
j
st+1
j
In designing the architecture and the optimization objective
of  the  trajectory  encoder  network,  we  emphasize  two  vital
points:  (i)  some  specific  parts  in  one  trajectory  are  essential
for  distinguishing  it  from  other  trajectories;  (ii)  the
representation 
 should imply the behavioral trends of the ego
system when under the attacks of attacker . To address point
(i), we design the architecture of the trajectory encoder as a
transformer [71] network because the attention mechanism can
help  the  encoder  focus  on  specific  essential  parts  of  the
trajectory.  In  terms  of  point  (ii),  we  design  a  forward
prediction loss 
 to help optimize the trajectory encoder
network, as shown in Fig. 2(a). Specifically, we feed 
 and 
into an extra decoder network, which outputs a prediction for
. We update the encoder and decoder networks together by
minimizing the following prediction loss:
 
Lforward(ϕ,η) =
m
∑
k=1
∑
st+1
j
∼τk
j
∥st+1
j
−ˆst+1
j ∥2,
ˆst+1
j
= f dec
η
(z j, st
j), t ∈{0,1,2,...,T −1},
(7)
st+1
j
t +1
f dec
η
η
zj
where 
 denotes  the  state  information  at  timestep 
 in
one sampled trajectory, and 
 indicates the decoder network
parameterized by . The key point is that by optimizing the
forward prediction loss, we force the encoded representation
 to  contain  behavioral  information  which  can  help  predict
the trend of these sampled trajectories.
zj
After defining the identification for attackers, we optimize
the  attacker  population  by  alternatively  conducting  the
processes of evolution and selection. For evolution, we update
the selected instances via the method described in Section 4.1,
leading  to  some  new  instances.  For  selection,  we  always
choose  those  more  distant  new  instances  to  add  to  the
population based on the definition of 
. In specific, each time
we want to update the population, we randomly select a fixed
proportion of attacker models from the population. We apply
MATD3 (c.f. Section 4.1) for each selected instance to update
its attack policy with a fixed number of samples, resulting in a
group of new attacker instances. Then for each new attacker,
we  find  the  closest  instance  to  it  in  the  population  and
compare their distance based on the trajectory representation.
Lei YUAN et al.    Communication-robust multi-agent learning by adaptable auxiliary multi-agent adversary generation
5

If their distance is over a fixed threshold, we retain the new
attacker  and  throw  out  the  current oldest  instance in  the
population; otherwise, we retain the better one by comparing
their attack performance and throw out the other. Note that we
utilize  a  First-In-First-Out  (FIFO)  queue  to  implement  the
attacker population and the oldest instance here means the first
element  of  the  queue.  The  whole  process  is  shown  in
Algorithm 1.
 4.3    Robust communication and training
Based  on  the  proposed  attacker  training  algorithm  and  the
population  optimization  method,  we  further  design  a  whole
training  framework  where  we  alternatively  train  the  ego
system  and  update  the  population.  In  fact,  throughout  the
whole  process  of  adversarial  training,  we  maintain  an  ego
system and a fixed-size population. In the phase of ego-system
training, we uniformly select an attacker from the population
at the start of each episode. We let the ego system roll out with
this attacker, and the roll-outed trajectory is added to a training
buffer. We update the ego system with data sampled from the
buffer, which equates to adversarially training the ego system
against the whole attacker population. On the other hand, in
the  phase  of  population  updating,  we  load  the  latest  ego
system model and apply the population updating mechanism
against  the  loaded  ego  system,  as  described  in  Algorithm  1.
The whole training process consists of multiple repetitions of
these two phases, and the ego system and the population are
iteratively  enhanced  in  the  whole  process.  The  whole
adversarial training procedure is described in Algorithm 2.
 5    Experimental results
Note that our approach is orthogonal to the underlying multi-
agent  communication  algorithm,  thus  to  validate  the
effectiveness  of  our  approach  in  this  section,  we  apply  our
approach  to  different  communication  methods  and  conduct
experiments  on  various  benchmarks.  In  specific,  we  aim  to
answer  the  following  questions  based  on  the  experimental
results in this section: 1) Can MA3C facilitate the robustness
of  multi-agent  communication,  and  does  each  part  in  our
approach make effect (Section 5.2)? 2) What kind of diverse
 
 
3
1
2
2
Fig. 2    The overall framework for the attacker population optimization. (a) We utilize the representation of the attacked ego system’s trajectories
to identify different attacker instances. Specifically, we apply an encoder-decoder architecture to learn the trajectory representation. The black
solid arrows indicate the direction of data flow and the red solid ones imply the direction of gradient flow. (b) This is a simple visualization case
for one time population updating. The locations of points imply the distances of representations and the color shades indicate the attack ability,
i.e., the attackers corresponding to deeper points are stronger attackers. For example, new Attacker  is accepted as it is distant enough with other
attackers, and the oldest Attacker  is removed; new Attacker  is accepted and the closest Attacker  is removed as it is weaker
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6
Front. Comput. Sci., 2024, 18(6): 186331

attacker  population  has  been  obtained  by  MA3C  (Section
5.3)?  3)  How  does  MA3C  perform  in  the  face  of
communication  attacks  with  unseen  perturbation  ranges
(Section  5.4)?  Besides,  we  offer  descriptions  about  the
benchmarks  in  Section  5.1  and  do  parameter  sensitivity
studies in Section 5.5.
Specifically, in our experiments, we apply our approach to
three  different  communication  algorithms:  Full-Comm  [5],
NDQ [20], and TarMAC [21], which are of different features.
Full-Comm is a popular communication paradigm, where each
agent  directly  broadcasts  their  individual  observations  and
updates  the  communication  networks  with  an  end-to-end
scheme  to  minimize  the  Q-value  estimation  loss,  showing
competitive communication ability in multiple scenarios [4,5].
NDQ  aims  to  generate  meaningful  messages  and  does
message  minimization  to  achieve  nearly  decomposable  Q-
value functions. TarMAC applies an attention mechanism in
the receiving end to help agents focus on the specific part of
the received messages. The details about NDQ and TarMAC
are shown in Appendixes A.1.
 5.1    Environments
In  general,  we  select  four  multi-agent  environments  (see
Fig. 3),  respectively  Hallway  [20],  StarCraft  Multi-Agent
Challenge (SMAC) [61], a task environment we designed for
multi-agent  communication  named  Gold  Panner  (GP),  and
Traffic Junction (TJ) [21].
● Hallway
Hallway is a multi-agent task with partial observability, where
multiple  agents  are  randomly  spawned  at  different  locations
and  required  to  reach  the  target  simultaneously.  In
experiments,  we  design  two  instances  of  the  Hallway  task,
where the first instance (Hallway-6×6) has two hallways with
a length of 6, and the second instance (Hallway-4×5×9) has
three hallways that have lengths of 4, 5 and 9, respectively.
● StarCraft Multi-Agent Challenge (SMAC)
StarCraft  Multi-Agent  Challenge  (SMAC)  is  a  popular
benchmark for multi-agent cooperation, where there are agent
units  from  two  camps,  and  the  goal  of  the  multi-agent
algorithm is to control one of the camps to defeat the other. In
particular,  we  select  two  maps  named  1o_2r_vs_4r  and
1o_10b_vs_1r  from  SMAC.  In  1o_2r_vs_4r,  an  Overseer  is
spawned  around  four  enemy  Reapers,  and  two  ally  Roaches
are expected to reach the enemies and defeat them. Alike, in
1o_10b_vs_1r,  one  Overseer  detects  a  Roach,  and  10
Banelings are required to reach and kill the enemies.
● Gold Panner (GP)
To  further  validate  our  approach’s  effectiveness,  we  also
design a task named Gold Panner (GP), which is a grid world
with  partial  observability.  This  task  divides  the  whole  map
into  several  parts,  and  the  agents  are  randomly  spawned  at
different regions. There exist one grid containing gold that is
initialized within sight of one agent, and agents are expected
to  load  the  gold  at  the  same  time.  The  core  idea  is  that  the
agent  nearby  the  gold  ought  to  communicate  the  messages
about the gold’s location to the other agents to help all agents
gather near the gold and load the gold together. We design two
instances, which are respectively GP-4r and GP-9r. In GP-4r,
there are 4 (2×2) regions, of which each region is a field with
size of [3, 3], and three agents existing in the map, while, in
GP-9r, there exist 9 (3×3) regions and 3 agents.
● Traffic Junction (TJ)
Traffic Junction (TJ) is a familiar environment for testing the
communication  performance  of  multi-agent  systems.  In  the
task of Traffic Junction, multiple vehicles move on the two-
way  roads  with  several  junctions  and  consistently  follow  a
fixed  route.  We  test  on  the  medium  version  map  of  Traffic
Junction, where the road dimension is 14, and there exist two
junctions  on  each  road  when  applying  our  approach  to  the
communication method TarMAC.
 5.2    Robustness comparison
To  testify  whether  our  approach  can  facilitate  robust
communication  when  applied  to  different  communication
algorithms  and  scenarios,  we  apply  our  approach  to  three
communication methods and select four tasks requiring agent
communication.  Specifically,  we  employ  Full-Comm  in
Hallway,  SMAC,  and  GP  tasks,  and  NDQ  and  TarMAC  in
SMAC  and  TJ,  respectively.  The  test  results  are  listed  in
Table 1, and more details about the experiments are provided
in Appendixes A.3.
For
 the
 compared
 algorithms,
 we
 design
 three
straightforward baselines, including Vanilla, Noise Adv. and
Instance  Adv.  respectively.  Vanilla  does  not  apply  any
adversarial training technique and learns the ego system policy
in  scenarios  without  communication  attacks.  Noise  Adv.
applies adversarial training with random noise attacks. While
Instance  Adv.  builds  one  single  communication  attacker,
 
 
Fig. 3    Experimental Environments used in this paper. (a) Hallway; (b) SMAC; (c) Gold Panner (GP); (d) Traffic Junction (TJ)
 
Lei YUAN et al.    Communication-robust multi-agent learning by adaptable auxiliary multi-agent adversary generation
7

training  the  communication  system  and  the  attacker
alternatively.  Actually,  Instance  Adv.  can  be  seen  as  an
ablation that does not use population, thus used to verify the
influence  of  attacker  population.  One  special  note  is  that  to
alleviate  the  overfitting  problem  of  adversarial  training  with
one single attacker and thus construct a stronger baseline, we
enhance  Instance  Adv.  by  maintaining  a  pool  of  historical
attacker  models  and  doing  adversarial  training  against  the
whole  pool.  Besides,  to  make  our  work  more  solid,  we
additionally compare our approach with two existing methods
for  robustness.  The  first  one  is  the  variant  of  RAP  in  our
experiment  setting,  which  also  adopts  the  adversary
population  for  training  robust  policies.  Its  main  difference
from our approach is that it does not explicitly optimize the
diversity of the population. Thus, we denote this baseline as
MA3C w/o div., which can be used to verify the effectiveness
of our diversity mechanism. The other compared method is a
recently  proposed  work  called  AME  [31],  which  builds  a
message-ensemble policy by aggregating the decision results
of utilizing different ablated message subsets.
For each method, we employ three different test modes: 1)
Normal means no communication attacks, which is to show
the communication performance of the multi-agent system in
clean  scenarios;  2) Random  noise tests  the  communication
robustness  under  random  noise  attacks;  3) Aggressive
Attackers additionally trains a set of unseen communication
attackers and utilizes them to do robustness test.
As we can see from Table 1, our approach MA3C exhibits
comparable  or  more  better  performance  than  other  baselines
when applied to Full-Comm. Concretely, the Vanilla baseline,
trained  in  a  natural  manner,  performs  excellently  in  the
Normal  setting  where  no  noise  exists  but  suffers  from
performance  drop  when  tested  in  a  noisy  communication
environment.  It  even  fails  when  encountering  aggressive
attackers (e.g., it obtains zero success rate on Hallway-4×5×6).
This phenomenon reveals the vulnerability of communication-
based  policy  and  calls  for  algorithm  design  to  enhance
communication robustness. As for Noise Adv., it works well
when tested with random noise attacks since this corresponds
0.87
to  its  training  situation.  However,  it  struggles  when
encountered  with  unseen  aggressive  attackers,  e.g.,  a
performance  drop  of 
 is  found  in  the  task  of  Hallway-
4x5x9.  We  hypothesize  that  the  reason  for  this  is  that  the
randomly  generated  noise  attacks  can  hardly  cover  some
specific  attack  patterns,  and  the  obtained  policy  fails  in  the
face  of  such  communication  attacks.  Furthermore,  for  the
Instance Adv., though we strengthen it by maintaining a pool
of historical attacker models, it still suffers from coordination
degradation in the Normal situation in different environments,
which  shows  that  adversarial  training  may  damage  the
communication ability, and has been discussed in some other
RL domains [19]. The performance advantage of MA3C and
MA3C  w/o  div.  over  Instance  Adv.  demonstrates  the
effectiveness of population.
Besides,  the  comparison  to  the  baseline  MA3C  w/o  div.,
which  conducts  a  similar  approach  to  RAP  in  our  setting,
proves  that  our  diversity  mechanism  has  good  gains  in  the
robustness of obtained ego system policy. The essential reason
behind it is that it can avoid homogeneity of instances in the
population  and  ensure  that  the  communication  attackers
encountered during the training phase can cover more attack
patterns.  Again,  when  compared  to  the  baseline  AME,  our
approach  still  exhibits  good  performance  advantages.  By
aggregating  the  decision  results  of  utilizing  multiple  ablated
message subsets, AME can somewhat alleviate the influence
of  communication  attacks  and  shows  relatively  good
performance  when  tested  with  random  noise  on  the
environments  of  Hallway  and  SMAC.  However,  when  we
apply  aggressive  attackers  to  test  its  robustness,  its
performance  faces  a  significant  drop,  which  shows  the
limitation of this kind of approach. Besides, we find that AME
performs terribly on the environment of GP. We hypothesize
the  reason  is  that  some  specific  channels  are  vital  for  the
agents to complete this task, so the practice of utilizing ablated
message
 subsets
 may
 miss
 these
 critical
 messages.
Considering  that  the  AME  approach  is  more  suited  to  the
setting where a portion of agents are attacked, we additionally
test  MA3C  and  AME  in  this  setting,  and  the  results  are
  
Table 1    Performance comparison under different attack modes
Hallway-6x6
Hallway-4x5x9
SMAC-1o_2r_vs_4r
SMAC-1o_10b_vs_1r
GP-4r
GP-9r
Normal
MA3C
±
0.94 0.05
±
0.97 0.05
±
0.86 0.02
±
0.62 0.01
±
0.87 0.02
±
0.82 0.01
Vanilla
±
1.00 0.00
±
1.00 0.00
±
0.81 0.06
±
0.63 0.04
±
0.88 0.03
±
0.82 0.02
Noise Adv.
±
1.00 0.00
±
0.99 0.01
±
0.88 0.04
±
0.6 0.05
±
0.88 0.03
±
0.85 0.02
MA3C w/o div.
±
0.98 0.02
±
0.66 0.46
±
0.86 0.02
±
0.62 0.03
±
0.86 0.09
±
0.81 0.03
Instance Adv.
±
0.52 0.48
±
0.67 0.47
±
0.84 0.02
±
0.57 0.04
±
0.86 0.03
±
0.82 0.03
AME
±
1.00 0.00
±
0.98 0.02
±
0.81 0.05
±
0.60 0.01
±
0.23 0.37
±
0.00 0.00
Random noise
MA3C
±
0.91 0.07
±
0.79 0.18
±
0.87 0.01
±
0.67 0.03
±
0.88 0.01
±
0.80 0.07
Vanilla
±
0.58 0.03
±
0.53 0.06
±
0.73 0.07
±
0.60 0.02
±
0.86 0.03
±
0.79 0.02
Noise Adv.
±
0.97 0.02
±
1.00 0.00
±
0.82 0.02
±
0.56 0.02
±
0.88 0.01
±
0.82 0.01
MA3C w/o div.
±
0.68 0.07
±
0.68 0.29
±
0.73 0.07
±
0.53 0.01
±
0.82 0.06
±
0.80 0.07
Instance Adv.
±
0.56 0.34
±
0.67 0.47
±
0.79 0.07
±
0.60 0.08
±
0.90 0.03
±
0.81 0.02
AME
±
0.61 0.06
±
0.79 0.03
±
0.71 0.13
±
0.59 0.08
±
0.22 0.37
±
0.00 0.00
Aggressive attackers
MA3C
±
0.91 0.22
±
0.98 0.01
±
0.67 0.03
±
0.62 0.03
±
0.81 0.02
±
0.76 0.03
Vanilla
±
0.09 0.19
±
0.00 0.00
±
0.26 0.12
±
0.57 0.03
±
0.38 0.02
±
0.30 0.05
Noise Adv.
±
0.61 0.37
±
0.13 0.14
±
0.51 0.02
±
0.54 0.03
±
0.41 0.13
±
0.48 0.11
MA3C w/o div.
±
0.57 0.39
±
0.96 0.03
±
0.54 0.05
±
0.61 0.02
±
0.68 0.06
±
0.71 0.01
Instance Adv.
±
0.63 0.42
±
0.88 0.14
±
0.28 0.01
±
0.61 0.04
±
0.81 0.02
±
0.76 0.03
AME
±
0.13 0.03
±
0.00 0.00
±
0.39 0.05
±
0.59 0.07
±
0.10 0.16
±
0.00 0.00
 
8
Front. Comput. Sci., 2024, 18(6): 186331

reported in Appendixes A.4. It can be seen that, even in this
test  setup,  MA3C  still  shows  better  communication
robustness, justifying the superiority of our approach.
 5.3    Attacking behavior analysis
To reveal what kinds of attackers have been obtained by our
approach, we conduct visualization analysis to check whether
our attacker population optimization method can help obtain a
population with diverse and qualified attackers in the task of
SMAC-1o_2r_vs_4r.  Specifically,  we  pre-train  a  multi-agent
communication system and apply our population mechanism
to train an attacker population to conquer the communication
system.  Each  attacker  instance  in  the  population  has  an
identification  vector,  as  mentioned  before.  We  take  out
attacker  instances  from  the  population  at  various  stages
throughout  the  training  process,  downscale  their  feature
vectors  to  one  dimension,  and  visualize  them  in Fig. 4.  We
expect the attackers to cover more regions along the horizontal
coordinate, which means diversity, and to be located as high
as possible for the vertical coordinate, indicating good attack
ability.
20
From the results shown in Fig. 4(a), we can see that scatters
on  the  top  tend  to  be  darker,  implying  that  the  population
optimization  process  can  help  obtain  stronger  attackers.  We
also compute the whole attack performance, which equals to
the  average  attack  performance  of  all  attackers  in  the
population, and plot the variant curve in Fig. 4(a), from which
we can see the upward trend of the population’s attack ability.
Besides, we mark the final population in the last iteration as
yellow  stars,  and  we  can  see  that  the  final 
 attackers  are
diverse  along  the  attacker  identification  feature  axis.  To
further check what attack patterns have been learned for the
attackers  in  the  population,  we  render  the  trajectories  for
specific  attacker  instances  and  find:  (1)  in  the  picture  at  the
bottom left, one Roach wanders around, leaving its teammate
alone to battle with the enemies; (2) in the picture at the top
right,  the  messages  of  the  Overseer  are  attacked,  and  fake
enemy  location  information  is  transmitted  to  the  two
teammates, leading to the two ally Roaches moving towards
the  fake  locations;  (3)  in  the  picture  at  the  bottom  right,
attacker  achieves  effective  attacks  by  tricking  the  allies  into
remaining
 silent
 during
 battling
 through
 message
perturbations.
Furthermore, since our approach and other baselines are all
agnostic  to  specific  communication  methods,  we  also
implement  them  on  other  typical  communication  methods
such  as  NDQ  and  TarMAC.  We  can  see  from Fig. 5,  the
superiority over other baselines demonstrates the generality of
MA3C.
500K
After  that,  we  conduct  experiment  to  investigate  whether
our approach can help obtain effective attackers. The concern
is  that  the  adversarial  training  will  be  meaningless  if  the
obtained  attackers  can  not  generate  practical  communication
attacks. Thus to confirm the validity of the attacker learning,
we independently train multiple attackers with our approach in
tasks  of  SMAC-1o_2r_vs_4r  and  GP-4r.  In  both  tasks,  we
restrict the learning process to be within 
 samples, and
the  vertical  coordinate  indicates  the  test  performance  of  the
attacked ego system. To further justify our practice of learning
the attacker via the MARL method, we additionally compare
with  a  baseline  that  learns  the  attacker  with  the  TD3  [68]
algorithm, which means treating it as a single-agent learning
problem.  A  baseline  named  Random  Noise  is  also  added  to
show the performance under random noise attacks. From the
learning curves in Fig. 6, we can see that the TD3 baseline and
our  approach  can  converge  to  much  lower  performance
compared  with  Random  Noise,  which  means  that  they  have
found  the  vulnerability  of  the  communication  system  and
learned effective attack patterns. Also, our approach exhibits
better attack performance than the TD3 baseline, which shows
the effectiveness of modeling the attacker learning as a multi-
agent learning problem, and the virtual agents actually learn to
cooperate  to  attack  the  communication  system,  obtaining
better attack performance.
 5.4    Policy transfer
B(m)
In fact, we suppose that the allowed perturbations are always
in a restricted set 
, and all the experiments above assume
 
 
Fig. 4    (a)  This  curve  traces  the  average  attacker  performance  of  the  attacker  population  as  evolution  rounds  increase;  (b)  population
visualization.  In  specific,  each  scatter  corresponds  to  an  attacker  instance,  and  we  use  the  color  depth  to  represent  the  training  stage  of  the
attackers, i.e., the lighter the color, the earlier the attacker model. The horizontal coordinate indicates the identification feature after dimension
reduction, and the vertical coordinate indicates the attack performance of the attacker model
 
Lei YUAN et al.    Communication-robust multi-agent learning by adaptable auxiliary multi-agent adversary generation
9

that the test perturbation range is the same as that utilized in
the adversarial training, of which the details are introduced in
Appendixes  A.3.  However,  in  many  practical  scenarios,  we
can not suppose the real communication attacks encountered
in  the  execution  phase  are  always  within  the  perturbation
range  designed  in  the  training  phase.  Thus,  we  wonder  how
our  approach  performs  when  generalizing  to  attacks  with
different perturbation ranges.
Firstly, we collect multiple aggressive attackedrs using the
same  method  in  Section  5.2,  but  with  different  perturbation
ranges when testing, which can be seen as a direct zero-shot
generalization  test.  We  conduct  the  experiment  in  tasks  of
SMAC-1o_2r_vs_4r  and  GP-4r,  and  the  results  are  recorded
as  plots  in Fig. 7.  From  the  results,  we  can  see  that  as  the
perturbation range increases, all algorithms face a consistent
performance
 degradation
 trend.
 This
 phenomenon
 is
expectable  because  when  the  perturbation  range  is  larger,
greater  changes  in  the  input  values  tend  to  have  a  greater
impact on the network’s output, thus causing larger harm to
the  communication  performance.  Besides,  we  find  our
 
 
Fig. 5    Robustness comparison when employing NDQ on SMAC-1o_2r_vs_4r and TarMAC on TJ, respectively. (a) NDQ:SMAC-1o2rvs4r;
(b) TarMAC:TJ
 
 
 
Fig. 6    Comparison of the attack ability of different methods. (a) SMAC-1o 2r vs 4r; (b) GP-4r
 
 
 
Fig. 7    Generalization test to different perturbation ranges. (a) SMAC-1o 2r vs 4r; (b) GP-4r
 
10
Front. Comput. Sci., 2024, 18(6): 186331

approach  MA3C  exhibits  good  generalization  performance
under  different  unseen  perturbation  ranges.  For  example,  in
the  task  of  SMAC-1o_2r_vs_4r,  MA3C  still  obtains  the
highest  win  rate  compared  to  baselines  and  ablations  under
different
 perturbation
 ranges.
 This
 demonstrates
 the
generalization ability of our approach, which is of significance
for the deployment in some unknown scenarios.
5
15
1.0
2
Furthermore,  we  also  conduct  experiments  to  look  into
whether  our  approach  MA3C  can  help  achieve  a  quick
adaptation  to  new  environment.  We  here  conduct  transfer
experiments  to  quite  large  perturbation  ranges  to  test  this
property. Specifically, we select perturbation ranges of  and
 in  the  tasks  of  Hallway-4×5×9  and  GP-4r,  respectively,
compared to choices of 
 and  during adversarial training.
To validate the effectiveness of the our approach, we compare
with  the  baseline  which  learns  from  scratch  in  the  noisy
scenarios. Besides, to certify that the transfer gain is not from
the extra pre-training, we add a baseline that only pre-trains
the ego system policy in a clean scenario. The results in Fig. 8
demonstrate that MA3C is equipped with a good property for
transferring to larger perturbation ranges, and we claim that it
is of great value for some real-world applications.
 5.5    Parameter sensitivity studies
To  investigate  how  the  parameters  introduced  in  our  work
influence  the  final  robust  performance  of  our  approach,  we
selectively conduct parameter sensitivity studies in the task of
GP-4r.  Specifically,  we  choose  three  core  hyper-parameters:
(1)  Population  size:  the  size  of  the  population;  (2)
Reproduction Ratio: the ratio of attackers each time we select
to do evolution; (3) Distance Threshold: a hyper-parameter to
determine whether a new attacker instance is novel enough for
the  current  population.  We  here  report  the  results  under
Aggressive Attackers and Random Noise. Note that the default
hyper-parameter selection in the experiments above is listed in
Appendixes  A.2,  where  the  default  value  for  Population,
Reproduction  Ratio  and  Distance  Threshold  are  respectively
20, 0.25, and 0.25.
As  we  can  see  from  the  results  in Fig. 9,  overall  the
performance of the communication system under Aggressive
Attackers is much lower than that under Random Noise, and
the performance under Random Noise is not sensitive to the
hyper-parameters,  which  confirms  that  Aggressive  Attackers
have higher attack ability than Random Noise. Among these
three hyper-parameters, we find that the Population Size has
the least impact on the algorithm performance, implying that a
population with size of five attacker instances works well in
this task. For Reproduction Ratio, an interesting phenomenon
is that the approach works poorly when Reproduction Ratio is
zero. This phenomenon is because when Reproduction Ratio
is  zero,  the  population  is  always  a  set  of  random  initialized
attacker instances, which can provide limited information for
adversarial training. Besides, for Distance Threshold, we find
a selection of value 0.25 works best in this task. A too small
Distance  Threshold  like  zero  ignores  the  process  of  diverse
selection,  and  this  makes  the  algorithm  degenerate  to  the
baseline  of  MA3C  w/o  div.,  while  a  too-large  Distance
Threshold  causes  our  algorithm  to  pay  less  attention  to  the
attack ability of the attacker instances.
 5.6    Trajectory encoder studies
Finally, in our approach, we adopt the transformer architecture
as  the  trajectory  encoder  that  helps  distinguish  the  attack
patterns of different attacker instances. The superiority of the
transformer  architecture  is  that  its  attention  mechanism  can
help  capture  the  critical  points  in  the  trajectory,  and  its
network  expressiveness  can  help  handle  complex  scenarios.
To  further  demonstrate  the  advantages  of  the  transformer
architecture, we additionally consider a variant of MA3C that
uses  Multi-Layer  Perception  (MLP)  and  Mean-Pooling
technology to obtain the trajectory representation as shown in
Fig. 10.  In  this  variant,  the  transformer  architecture  of  the
trajectory  encoder  is  removed.  We  use  this  experiment  to
study how much influence the transformer architecture has.
We apply this variant to the GP environment, of which the
results  are  shown  in Table 2.  Note  that  this  variant  differs
from  MA3C  only  in  the  trajectory  encoder  network  and  all
other training details are the same. In fact, we can see from the
results that MA3C with ordinary trajectory encoder achieves
comparable performance to MA3C when tested with random
noise attacks. However, when tested with aggressive attackers,
this variant suffers a greater drop in performance compared to
MA3C, but still shows better robustness than MA3C w/o div.
slightly. For example, when tested with aggressive attackers,
MA3C,  MA3C  w/ordinary  encoder,  and  MA3C  w/o  div.
 
 
Fig. 8    Transfer to larger perturbation range. (a) Hallway-4×5×9; (b) GP-4r
 
Lei YUAN et al.    Communication-robust multi-agent learning by adaptable auxiliary multi-agent adversary generation
11

suffer  performance  drops2) of  7%,  19%,  and  21%,
respectively. We hypothesize that this is because the ordinary
encoder  fails  to  capture  the  differences  between  certain
trajectories,
 thus
 interfering
 with
 MA3C’s
 diversity
mechanism. This results in the variant failing to cover some
specific  attack  patterns  and  causing  a  greater  performance
drop.
 6    Final remarks
How to obtain a robust communication-based policy recently
became  an  emergent  for  policy  deployment.  Instead  of
employing  existing  techniques  to  get  a  robust  policy  under
some  constraints,  we  take  a  further  step  for  this  issue  by
learning  adaptable  multi-agent  auxiliary  adversaries  to
promote
 robustness
 for
 communication-based
 policy.
Sufficient  experiments  conducted  on  multiple  cooperative
benchmarks  demonstrate  the  high  robustness  ability  of  our
proposed  method,  other  results  also  show  its  high
generalization ability for various perturbation ranges, and the
learned policy can transfer learned robustness ability to new
tasks after fine-tuning with a few samples. As we consider a
limited perturbation set, how we can develop an autonomous
paradigm like curriculum learning to find the communication
ability  boundary  is  an  invaluable  direction,  and  developing
efficient and effective MARL communication methods under
the  open-environment  scenarios  [72]  is  challenging  but  of
great  value  in  the  future.  Also,  as  discussed  in  Appendixes
A.5,  the  inclusion  of  auxiliary  adversaries  also  brings  more
training overhead. In the future, we hope to further optimize
our approach to improve its training efficiency.
 Acknowledgements    This  work  was  supported  by  the  National  Key  R&D
Program  of  China  (2020AAA0107200),  the  National  Natural  Science
Foundation  of  China  (Grant  Nos.  61921006,  61876119,  62276126),  the
Natural Science Foundation of Jiangsu (BK20221442), and the Program B for
Outstanding PhD Candidate of Nanjing University. We thank Ziqian Zhang
and Lihe Li for their useful suggestions.
 Competing  interests    The  authors  declare  that  they  have  no  competing
interests or financial conflicts to disclose.
 Open Access    This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution
4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution
and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate
credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative
Commons licence, and indicate if changes were made.
The images or other third party material in this article are included in the
article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line
to the material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons
licence  and  your  intended  use  is  not  permitted  by  statutory  regulation  or
exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from
the copyright holder.
To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/.
 
 Appendixes
A.1    Introduction to the selected baselines
NDQ [20]  considers  that  many  multi-agent  tasks  in  the  real
world  are  not  fully  decomposable  and  then  achieve  nearly
decomposable  Q-functions  via  communication  minimization.
 
 
Fig. 9    Test  results  of  parameter  sensitivity  studies.  (a)  Studies  of  population  size;  (b)  studies  of  reproduction  ratio;  (c)  studies  of  distance
threshold
 
 
 
Fig. 10    The  architecture  of  the  ordinary  trajectory  encoder.  We  feed  the
state  information  at  each  time  step  into  a  shared  MLP  network,  and  then
perform mean pooling on the outputs to obtain the embedding vector of the
trajectory.
 
  
Table 2    Test results for the trajectory encoder studies
MA3C
MA3C w/ordinary
encoder
MA3C w/o
div.
GP-4r
Normal
±
0.87 0.02
±
0.90 0.02
±
0.86 0.09
Random Noise
±
0.88 0.01
±
0.90 0.03
±
0.82 0.06
Aggressive Attackers
±
0.81 0.02
±
0.73 0.04
±
0.68 0.06
GP-9r
Normal
±
0.82 0.01
±
0.82 0.03
±
0.81 0.03
Random Noise
±
0.80 0.07
±
0.80 0.05
±
0.80 0.07
Aggressive Attackers
±
0.76 0.03
±
0.70 0.06
±
0.71 0.01
 
12
Front. Comput. Sci., 2024, 18(6): 186331
p(Normal)−p(Aggressive Attackers)
p(Normal)
p(X)
X
2) The performance drop rate here is calculated as the percentage of drop in performance when moving from the Normal mode to being attacked by Aggressive
Attackers, i.e., 
, where 
 is the performance in the test mode of 
.

Specifically,  it  trains  the  communication-based  policy  by
maximizing the mutual information between the agents’ action
selection and the message sent to the corresponding teammate.
It also minimizes the entropy of messages between agents to
avoid distribution collapse. Each agent broadcasts messages to
all other agents and uses the received message to augment the
local policy. As NDQ minimizes the message entropy, it can
extract  the  most  useful  part  for  decision-making  and  shows
great performance on many tasks like SMAC.
TarMAC [21]  is  a  widely  used  MARL  communication
approach, which applies an attention mechanism to extract the
most  valuable  information  from  multiple  received  messages.
Concretely, each agent generates signature and query vectors
as  the  message,  and  the  message  is  then  broadcasted  to  all
teammates.  In  the  message-receiving  phase,  the  attention
weights of incoming messages are obtained by calculating the
similarity between the query vector and the signature vector of
each  incoming  message.  Then  a  weighted  sum  over  all
incoming messages is performed to determine the message an
agent.  The  extracted  message  is  finally  used  to  augment  the
local observation for decentralized execution.
A.2    Implementation details
Our  implementation  of  MA3C  is  based  on  PyMARL3) with
StarCraft 2.4.6.2.69232. We adopt its default settings for some
common hyper-parameters like learning rate. The choices of
other  hyper-parameters  in  our  experiments  are  listed  in
Table A1.
A.3    Experimental details
In this section, we provide more experimental details to help
the  reader  better  understand  or  reproduce  our  experimental
results.  Specifically,  we  discuss  the  details  about  robustness
comparison (Section 5.2), attacking behavior analysis (Section
5.3),  policy  transfer  (Section  5.4),  and  parameter  sensitivity
studies  (Section  5.6),  respectively.  Note  that  all  experiments
are  conducted  with  five  independent  runs  and  we  report  the
mean and standard deviation.
● Robustness comparison
ˆm
∥m−ˆm∥p ⩽ϵ
m
B = { ˆm | ∥m−ˆm∥1 = ϵ}
1
{ϵ,−ϵ}
ˆm
∥m−ˆm∥1 ⩽ϵ
ϵ
As  we  have  mentioned  in  the  section  of  Problem  Setting,  if
perturbation  without  bounds  is  allowed,  the  attacker  can  be
arbitrarily  strong  and  effective  defence  may  be  impossible.
Thus, to consider a more realistic setting, we specify that the
perturbed  messages  are  restricted  in  a  specific  set,  e.g.,  the
perturbed  messages 
 ought  to  satisfy 
 with
respect  to  the  original  messages 
.  Actually,  we  adopted  a
practice  that  the  perturbed  messages  are  constrained  to  a  1-
norm ball centered on the original communication messages,
which  means  the  set 
 for  most
experiments,  except  for  the  experiments  on  Hallway.  The
observation  dimension  on  Hallway  equals  to ;  thus  if  we
apply the previous practice, the action space will degenerate to
a  discrete  action  space  of 
 when  attacking  the
communication  system  learned  with  Full-Comm.  For
experiments  on  Hallway,  we  constrain 
 to  satisfy
.  Besides,  the  adopted  magnitude 
 for  each
experiment is listed in Table A2.
Besides,  for  the  test  mode  of Aggressive  Attackers,  we
additionally train a set of unseen communication attackers and
utilize  them  to  test  the  robustness  of  different  methods.
Specifically,  we  extraly  train  a  diverse  attacker  population
  
Table A1    Selected hyper-parameters in our experiments
Hyper-parameter name
Other
Experiments Hallway-4x5x9 TarMAC: TJ
GP-4r, GP-9r
Population Size (The number of attackers one population contains)
20
Reproduction Ratio (The proportion of updated agents in the population during each evolution)
0.25
Distance Threshold (The threshold to determine whether the new attacker is novel enough)
0.25
Critic Update Times (The number of times the critic is updated for each actor update in
MATD3)
5
Num of Sampled Trajectories (The number of sampled trajectories used to encode attacker
identification)
10
Alternate Update Times (The number of iterations of alternate updates between the ego system
and the attacker population)
15
30
20
6
Num of Samples for Ego System in One Loop (The number of samples used to update the ego
system in each iteration)
205000
505000
Evolution Times in One Loop (The number of times the population conduct evolution in each
iteration)
10
Num of Samples for Attacker in One Evolution (The number of samples used to update the
attacker in each evolution)
10000
 
  
ϵ
Table A2    Adopted magnitude  for each experiment. Comm. Alg. is short for Communication Algorithm
Comm. Alg.
Full-Comm
Task
Hallway-6x6
Hallway-4x5x9
SMAC-1o_2r_vs_4r
SMAC-1o_10b_vs_1r
ϵ
1.5
1.0
10
25
Comm. Alg.
Full-Comm
NDQ
TarMAC
Task
GP-4r
GP-9r
SMAC-1o_2r_vs_4r
TJ
ϵ
2
2
6
16
 
Lei YUAN et al.    Communication-robust multi-agent learning by adaptable auxiliary multi-agent adversary generation
13
3) We  use  PyMARL  with  SC2.4.6.2.6923  for  the  experiments  on  SMAC-1o_2r_vs_4r  and  SMAC-1o_10b_vs_1b.  Note  that  performance  is  not  always
comparable among versions

20
20
with  the  technique  of  MA3C.  Then  we  evenly  split  the
training  process  of  the  population  into  five  stages,  and
randomly sample four attacker models from the stored models
at each stage, finally resulting in a total of 
 attacker models.
We adopt the average performance of the ego system policy
under the attacks of these 
 attacker models to represent the
robustness performance.
● Attacking behavior analysis
ϵ
10
2
In  the  experiments  for  Attacking  Behavior  Analysis,  we
studied  the  attack  ability  of  our  approach  and  the  obtained
attacker population. Specifically, for both the experiments of
attack  ability  comparison  and  population  visualization,  we
firstly  pre-train  a  communication-based  policy  for  the  ego
system,  then  we  apply  MATD3  and  TD3  to  learn  attacker
models to this ego system for the experiments of attack ability
comparison,  and  apply  MA3C  to  optimize  an  attacker
population for population visualization. Besides, the adopted
magnitude 
 is  consistent  with  that  in  the  section  of
Robustness Comparison, 
 for SMAC-1o_2r_vs_4r and  for
GP-4r.
● Policy transfer
ϵ
{5,10,20,40,60,80}
10
{1,2,4,6,8}
2
1
2
5
15
In this part, we investigated the generalization ability of our
approach to different perturbation ranges. Actually, we utilize
the same setting as before, which means that we constrain the
perturbed  messages  to  be  on  a  1-norm  ball  centered  on  the
original  messages  on  task  of  SMAC  and  GP.  However,  we
modify the magnitude  to test the generalization ability and
transfer  ability  of  our  approach.  For  the  zero-shot
generalization
 test,
 we
 select
 a
 magnitude
 set
 of
 for SMAC-1o_2r_vs_4r, where 
 is the
magnitude for adversarial training, and select a magnitude set
of 
 for  GP-4r,  where 
 is  the  magnitude  for
adversarial  training.  For  the  fine-tuning  transfer  test,  the
magnitudes for training are  and  respectively for Hallway-
4x5x9  and  GP-4r,  while  the  transfer  perturbation  ranges  are
respectively  and 
.
● Parameter sensitivity studies
In the section of Parameter Sensitivity Studies, we selectively
experiment on the task of GP-4r to investigate the parameter
sensitivity of our approach. In specific, we consider three main
hyper-parameters,  which  are  Population  Size,  Reproduction
Ratio,  and  Distance  Threshold,  respectively.  When  studying
the  influence  of  one  specific  hyper-parameters,  the  other
hyper-parameters are set as the default values utilized in the
main  experiments.  For  example,  when  we  investigate  the
hyper-parameters Population Size, the Reproduction Ratio and
0.25
Distance Threshold are both set as 
. The other settings like
perturbation range are the same as those in the experiments of
Robustness Comparison.
A.4    Additional experiments for the AME baseline
Considering that the AME approach is more suited to the test
setting where a part of communication channels are attacked,
we  further  conduct  the  test  in  this  setup  to  justify  the
effectiveness  of  our  approach.  Specifically,  we  conduct
experiments in the task of SMAC-1o_2r_vs_4r and GP-4r, and
the results are reported in Table A3. From the results, we can
see that the AME approach shows better robustness when only
partial  communication  channels  are  attacked  compared  with
the  results  in Table 1.  However,  our  approach  MA3C  still
exhibits good performance advantages over the AME baseline,
which validates the effectiveness of our approach.
A.5    Discussion about training efficiency of our approach
In  our  proposed  method,  we  maintain  an  additional  attacker
population  and  conduct  centralized  adversarial  training  to
enhance
 the
 communication
 policy’s
 resilience
 to
communication  attacks  and  maintain  robust  communication
performance. This naturally results in extra training overhead.
To  gain  a  more  intuitive  and  in-depth  understanding  of  our
algorithm’s  training  efficiency,  we  present  an  analysis
experiment in this section, comparing our approach’s time and
memory  costs  with  those  of  other  algorithms  in  two
experimental  settings:  GP-4r  and  GP-9r.  To  provide  a  more
comprehensive  comparison  that  covers  both  space  and  time
consumption, we take into consideration the runtime, memory
usage and graphics memory usage of different algorithms, of
which  the  results  are  recorded  in Table A4.  In  specific,  the
metric “Time” measures  the  actual  time  spent  by  different
algorithms for one whole training process, where we keep the
number of training samples the same for each algorithm. The
other  two  metrics, “Memory” and “Graphics  Memory”,
represent the average CPU memory usage and GPU memory
usage  during  the  algorithm  process,  respectively.  For  the
computational resources used in this analysis experiment, we
utilized a server equipped with an 80-core Intel(R) Xeon(R)
Gold  5218R  CPU  @  2.10  GHz  and  four  NVIDIA  GeForce
RTX 3090 GPUs. In order to make a fair comparison between
different  algorithms,  we  controlled  the  experiments  of  each
algorithm to be run under the same machine load pressure. As
can  be  seen  from  the  results,  the  CPU  memory  usage  of
different  algorithms  is  quite  similar,  as  the  CPU  memory
usage  is  primarily  determined  by  the  sample  replay  buffer.
However,  compared  to  the  baseline  Instance  Adv.  and  Full-
Comm  algorithm,  our  algorithm  clearly  requires  more  time
and GPU memory usage. The main reason for this is that our
  
Table A3    Additional test results for the AME baseline
MA3C
AME
SMAC-1o_2r_vs_4r
Normal
±
0.86 0.02
±
0.81 0.05
Random Noise
±
0.84 0.02
±
0.76 0.07
Aggressive Attackers
±
0.81 0.01
±
0.60 0.06
GP-4r
Normal
±
0.87 0.02
±
0.23 0.37
Random Noise
±
0.87 0.02
±
0.24 0.40
Aggressive Attackers
±
0.86 0.01
±
0.17 0.29
 
14
Front. Comput. Sci., 2024, 18(6): 186331

algorithm  needs  to  maintain  an  additional  population  of
attackers, where the attacker training and the evolution process
of  the  population  brings  extra  time  and  GPU  memory
consumption.  Nevertheless,  the  training  time  and  GPU
memory usage of MA3C and MA3C w/ ordinary encoder are
similar,  indicating  that  the  transformer  encoder  network
structure  does  not  have  a  significant  impact  on  the  training
efficiency of the algorithm. To some extent, this is reasonable,
as we only used a transformer-like network structure without
adopting  a  very  large  network  size.  In  the  future,  we  will
further optimize the algorithm in terms of underlying code and
algorithm design to improve the overall training efficiency of
our method.
 
References
 Zhu  C,  Dastani  M,  Wang  S.  A  survey  of  multi-agent  reinforcement
learning with communication. 2022, arXiv preprint arXiv: 2203.08975
1.
 Ding Z, Huang T, Lu Z. Learning individually inferred communication
for  multi-agent  cooperation.  In:  Proceedings  of  the  34th  International
Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems. 2020, 1851
2.
 Wang R, He X, Yu R, Qiu W, An B, Rabinovich Z. Learning efficient
multi-agent  communication:  an  information  bottleneck  approach.  In:
Proceedings of the 37th International Conference on Machine Learning.
2020, 919
3.
 Xue D, Yuan L, Zhang Z, Yu Y. Efficient multi-agent communication
via  Shapley  message  value.  In:  Proceedings  of  the  31st  International
Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence. 2022, 578−584
4.
 Guan C, Chen F, Yuan L, Wang C, Yin H, Zhang Z, Yu Y. Efficient
multi-agent communication via self-supervised information aggregation.
In:  Proceedings  of  the  36th  International  Conference  on  Neural
Information Processing Systems. 2022
5.
 Foerster  J  N,  Assael  Y  M,  de  Freitas  N,  Whiteson  S.  Learning  to
communicate  with  deep  multi-agent  reinforcement  learning.  In:
Proceedings of the 30th International Conference on Neural Information
Processing Systems. 2016, 2145−2153
6.
 Kim W, Park J, Sung Y. Communication in multi-agent reinforcement
learning:  intention  sharing.  In:  Proceedings  of  the  9th  International
Conference on Learning Representations. 2021
7.
 Yuan L, Wang J, Zhang F, Wang C, Zhang Z, Yu Y, Zhang C. Multi-
agent  incentive  communication  via  decentralized  teammate  modeling.
In: Proceedings of the 36th AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence.
2022, 9466−9474
8.
 Chakraborty A, Alam M, Dey V, Chattopadhyay A, Mukhopadhyay D.
Adversarial attacks and defences: a survey. 2018, arXiv preprint arXiv:
1810.00069
9.
 Moos J, Hansel K, Abdulsamad H, Stark S, Clever D, Peters J. Robust
reinforcement  learning:  a  review  of  foundations  and  recent  advances.
Machine Learning and Knowledge Extraction, 2022, 4(1): 276–315
10.
 Zhang H, Chen H, Xiao C, Li B, Liu M, Boning D S, Hsieh C J. Robust
deep  reinforcement  learning  against  adversarial  perturbations  on  state
observations.  In:  Proceedings  of  the  34th  International  Conference  on
Neural Information Processing Systems. 2020, 1765
11.
 Oikarinen T, Zhang W, Megretski A, Daniel L, Weng T W. Robust deep
reinforcement learning through adversarial loss. In: Proceedings of the
34th  International  Conference  on  Neural  Information  Processing
Systems. 2021, 26156−26167
12.
 Xu M, Liu Z, Huang P, Ding W, Cen Z, Li B, Zhao D. Trustworthy
reinforcement  learning  against  intrinsic  vulnerabilities:  robustness,
safety, and generalizability. 2022, arXiv preprint arXiv: 2209.08025
13.
 Pan  X,  Seita  D,  Gao  Y,  Canny  J.  Risk  averse  robust  adversarial
reinforcement  learning.  In:  Proceedings  of  2019  International
Conference on Robotics and Automation. 2019, 8522−8528
14.
 Zhang  H,  Chen  H,  Boning  D  S,  Hsieh  C  J.  Robust  reinforcement
learning  on  state  observations  with  learned  optimal  adversary.  In:
Proceedings  of  the  9th  International  Conference  on  Learning
Representations. 2021
15.
 Lin J, Dzeparoska K, Zhang S Q, Leon-Garcia A, Papernot N. On the
robustness  of  cooperative  multi-agent  reinforcement  learning.  In:
Proceedings  of  2020  IEEE  Security  and  Privacy  Workshops.  2020,
62−68
16.
 Hu Y, Zhang Z. Sparse adversarial attack in multi-agent reinforcement
learning. 2022, arXiv preprint arXiv: 2205.09362
17.
 Xue  W,  Qiu  W,  An  B,  Rabinovich  Z,  Obraztsova  S,  Yeo  C  K.  Mis-
spoke or mis-lead: achieving robustness in multi-agent communicative
reinforcement  learning.  In:  Proceedings  of  the  21st  International
Conference  on  Autonomous  Agents  and  Multiagent  Systems.  2022,
1418−1426
18.
 Vinitsky  E,  Du  Y,  Parvate  K,  Jang  K,  Abbeel  P,  Bayen  A.  Robust
reinforcement  learning  using  adversarial  populations.  2020,  arXiv
preprint arXiv: 2008.01825
19.
 Wang  T,  Wang  J,  Zheng  C,  Zhang  C.  Learning  nearly  decomposable
value functions via communication minimization. In: Proceedings of the
8th International Conference on Learning Representations. 2020
20.
 Das A, Gervet T, Romoff J, Batra D, Parikh D, Rabbat M, Pineau J.
TarMAC: targeted multi-agent communication. In: Proceedings of the
36th International Conference on Machine Learning. 2019, 1538−1546
21.
 Sukhbaatar S, Szlam A, Fergus R. Learning multiagent communication
with  backpropagation.  In:  Proceedings  of  the  30th  International
Conference  on  Neural  Information  Processing  Systems.  2016,
2252−2260
22.
 Lowe  R,  Foerster  J  N,  Boureau  Y,  Pineau  J,  Dauphin  Y  N.  On  the
pitfalls of measuring emergent communication. In: Proceedings of the
18th International Conference on Autonomous Agents and MultiAgent
Systems. 2019, 693−701
23.
 Eccles  T,  Bachrach  Y,  Lever  G,  Lazaridou  A,  Graepel  T.  Biases  for
emergent  communication  in  multi-agent  reinforcement  learning.  In:
Proceedings of the 33rd International Conference on Neural Information
Processing Systems. 2019, 1176
24.
 Mao H, Zhang Z, Xiao Z, Gong Z, Ni Y. Learning agent communication
25.
  
Table A4    Training efficiency comparison of algorithms
Environment
Algorithm
Time
Memory /GB
Graphics memory /MB
GP-4r
MA3C
5d 2h 56m
2.56
1178
MA3C w/ ordinary encoder
5d 2h 13m
2.46
1178
Instance Adv.
1d 5h 36m
2.41
1163
Full-Comm
9h 9m
2.28
1148
GP-9r
MA3C
4d 13h 16m
2.51
1182
MA3C w/ ordinary encoder
4d 9h 18m
2.43
1182
Instance Adv.
1d 5h 18m
2.42
1168
Full-Comm
8h 31m
2.28
1148
 
Lei YUAN et al.    Communication-robust multi-agent learning by adaptable auxiliary multi-agent adversary generation
15

under  limited  bandwidth  by  message  pruning.  In:  Proceedings  of  the
34th AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence. 2020, 5142−5149
 Mao  H,  Zhang  Z,  Xiao  Z,  Gong  Z,  Ni  Y.  Learning  multi-agent
communication  with  double  attentional  deep  reinforcement  learning.
Autonomous Agents and Multi-Agent Systems, 2020, 34(1): 32
26.
 Wang Y, Zhong F, Xu J, Wang Y. ToM2C: target-oriented multi-agent
communication and cooperation with theory of mind. In: Proceedings of
the 10th International Conference on Learning Representations. 2021
27.
 Zhang  S  Q,  Zhang  Q,  Lin  J.  Efficient  communication  in  multi-agent
reinforcement  learning  via  variance  based  control.  In:  Proceedings  of
the  33rd  International  Conference  on  Neural  Information  Processing
Systems. 2019, 291
28.
 Zhang  S  Q,  Zhang  Q,  Lin  J.  Succinct  and  robust  multi-agent
communication with temporal message control. In: Proceedings of the
34th  International  Conference  on  Neural  Information  Processing
Systems. 2020, 1449
29.
 Mitchell R, Blumenkamp J, Prorok A. Gaussian process based message
filtering  for  robust  multi-agent  cooperation  in  the  presence  of
adversarial communication. 2020, arXiv preprint arXiv: 2012.00508
30.
 Sun Y, Zheng R, Hassanzadeh P, Liang Y, Feizi S, Ganesh S, Huang F.
Certifiably  robust  policy  learning  against  adversarial  multi-agent
communication. In: Proceedings of the 11th International Conference on
Learning Representations. 2023
31.
 OroojlooyJadid A, Hajinezhad D. A review of cooperative multi-agent
deep reinforcement learning. 2019, arXiv preprint arXiv: 1908.03963
32.
 Christianos  F,  Papoudakis  G,  Rahman  M  A,  Albrecht  S  V.  Scaling
multi-agent reinforcement learning with selective parameter sharing. In:
Proceedings of the 38th International Conference on Machine Learning.
2021, 1989−1998
33.
 Wang  J,  Ren  Z,  Han  B,  Ye  J,  Zhang  C.  Towards  understanding
cooperative  multi-agent  Q-learning  with  value  factorization.  In:
Proceedings of the 34th International Conference on Neural Information
Processing Systems. 2021, 29142−29155
34.
 Papoudakis G, Christianos F, Rahman A, Albrecht S V. Dealing with
non-stationarity in multi-agent deep reinforcement learning. 2019, arXiv
preprint arXiv: 1906.04737
35.
 Peng Z, Li Q, Hui K M, Liu C, Zhou B. Learning to simulate self-driven
particles system with coordinated policy optimization. In: Proceedings
of the 34th International Conference on Neural Information Processing
Systems. 2021, 10784−10797
36.
 Kouzehgar  M,  Meghjani  M,  Bouffanais  R.  Multi-agent  reinforcement
learning  for  dynamic  ocean  monitoring  by  a  swarm  of  buoys.  In:
Proceedings of Global Oceans 2020. 2020, 1−8
37.
 Wang J, Xu W, Gu Y, Song W, Green T C. Multi-agent reinforcement
learning for active voltage control on power distribution networks. In:
Proceedings of the 34th International Conference on Neural Information
Processing Systems. 2021, 3271−3284
38.
 Xue  K,  Xu  J,  Yuan  L,  Li  M,  Qian  C,  Zhang  Z,  Yu  Y.  Multi-agent
dynamic  algorithm  configuration.  In:  Proceedings  of  the  36th
International  Conference  on  Neural  Information  Processing  Systems.
2022
39.
 Guo J, Chen Y, Hao Y, Yin Z, Yu Y, Li S. Towards comprehensive
testing  on  the  robustness  of  cooperative  multi-agent  reinforcement
learning. In: Proceedings of 2022 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition Workshops. 2022, 114−121
40.
 Li  S,  Wu  Y,  Cui  X,  Dong  H,  Fang  F,  Russell  S.  Robust  multi-agent
reinforcement learning via minimax deep deterministic policy gradient.
In: Proceedings of the 33rd AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence.
2019, 4213−4220
41.
 Lowe R, Wu Y, Tamar A, Harb J, Abbeel P, Mordatch I. Multi-agent
42.
actor-critic  for  mixed  cooperative-competitive  environments.  In:
Proceedings of the 31st International Conference on Neural Information
Processing Systems. 2017, 6382−6393
 T. van der Heiden T, Salge C, Gavves E, van Hoof H. Robust multi-
agent reinforcement learning with social empowerment for coordination
and communication. 2020, arXiv preprint arXiv: 2012.08255
43.
 Zhang K, Sun T, Tao Y, Genc S, Mallya S, Başar T. Robust multi-agent
reinforcement learning with model uncertainty. In: Proceedings of the
34th  International  Conference  on  Neural  Information  Processing
Systems. 2020, 887
44.
 Phan T, Gabor T, Sedlmeier A, Ritz F, Kempter B, Klein C, Sauer H,
Schmid  R,  Wieghardt  J,  Zeller  M,  Linnhoff-Popien  C.  Learning  and
testing resilience in cooperative multi-agent systems. In: Proceedings of
the  19th  International  Conference  on  Autonomous  Agents  and
Multiagent Systems. 2020, 1055−1063
45.
 Phan T, Belzner L, Gabor T, Sedlmeier A, Ritz F, Linnhoff-Popien C.
Resilient  multi-agent  reinforcement  learning  with  adversarial  value
decomposition.  In:  Proceedings  of  the  35th  AAAI  Conference  on
Artificial Intelligence. 2021, 11308−11316
46.
 Jaderberg  M,  Dalibard  V,  Osindero  S,  Czarnecki  W  M,  Donahue  J,
Razavi A, Vinyals O, Green T, Dunning I, Simonyan K, Fernando C,
Kavukcuoglu  K.  Population  based  training  of  neural  networks.  2017,
arXiv preprint arXiv: 1711.09846
47.
 Jaderberg M, Czarnecki W M, Dunning I, Marris L, Lever G, Castañeda
A G, Beattie C, Rabinowitz N C, Morcos A S, Ruderman A, Sonnerat
N, Green T, Deason L, Leibo J Z, Silver D, Hassabis D, Kavukcuoglu
K, Graepel T. Human-level performance in 3D multiplayer games with
population-based  reinforcement  learning.  Science,  2019,  364(6443):
859–865
48.
 Qian  H,  Yu  Y.  Derivative-free  reinforcement  learning:  a  review.
Frontiers of Computer Science, 2021, 15(6): 156336
49.
 Derek K, Isola P. Adaptable agent populations via a generative model of
policies. In: Proceedings of the 34th International Conference on Neural
Information Processing Systems. 2021, 3902−3913
50.
 Parker-Holder  J,  Pacchiano  A,  Choromanski  K,  Roberts  S.  Effective
diversity in population based reinforcement learning. In: Proceedings of
the  34th  International  Conference  on  Neural  Information  Processing
Systems. 2020, 1515
51.
 Luo F M, Xu T, Lai H, Chen X H, Zhang W, Yu Y. A survey on model-
based reinforcement learning. 2022, arXiv preprint arXiv: 2206.09328
52.
 Zhao R, Song J, Haifeng H, Gao Y, Wu Y, Sun Z, Wei Y. Maximum
entropy population based training for zero-shot human-AI coordination.
2021, arXiv preprint arXiv: 2112.11701
53.
 Xue K, Wang Y, Yuan L, Guan C, Qian C, Yu Y. Heterogeneous multi-
agent  zero-shot  coordination  by  coevolution.  2022,  arXiv  preprint
arXiv: 2208.04957
54.
 Wang  Y,  Xue  K,  Qian  C.  Evolutionary  diversity  optimization  with
clustering-based selection for reinforcement learning. In: Proceedings of
the 10th International Conference on Learning Representations. 2021
55.
 Cully  A,  Demiris  Y.  Quality  and  diversity  optimization:  a  unifying
modular framework. IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary Computation,
2018, 22(2): 245–259
56.
 Chatzilygeroudis  K,  Cully  A,  Vassiliades  V,  Mouret  J  B.  Quality-
diversity  optimization:  a  novel  branch  of  stochastic  optimization.  In:
Pardalos  P  M,  Rasskazova  V,  Vrahatis  M  N,  eds.  Black  Box
Optimization, Machine Learning, and No-Free Lunch Theorems. Cham:
Springer, 2021, 109−135
57.
 Lim  B,  Grillotti  L,  Bernasconi  L,  Cully  A.  Dynamics-aware  quality-
diversity  for  efficient  learning  of  skill  repertoires.  In:  Proceedings  of
2022  International  Conference  on  Robotics  and  Automation.  2022,
58.
16
Front. Comput. Sci., 2024, 18(6): 186331

5360−5366
 Pierrot  T,  Richard  G,  Beguir  K,  Cully  A.  Multi-objective  quality
diversity optimization. In: Proceedings of the Genetic and Evolutionary
Computation Conference. 2022, 139−147
59.
 Chalumeau F, Boige R, Lim B, Macé V, Allard M, Flajolet A, Cully A,
Pierrot T. Neuroevolution is a competitive alternative to reinforcement
learning for skill discovery. 2022, arXiv preprint arXiv: 2210.03516
60.
 Samvelyan M, Rashid T, de Witt C S, Farquhar G, Nardelli N, Rudner T
G  J,  Hung  C  M,  Torr  P  H  S,  Foerster  J,  Whiteson  S.  The  StarCraft
multi-agent  challenge.  In:  Proceedings  of  the  18th  International
Conference  on  Autonomous  Agents  and  MultiAgent  Systems.  2019,
2186−2188
61.
 Oliehoek  F  A,  Amato  C.  A  Concise  Introduction  to  Decentralized
POMDPs. Cham: Springer, 2016
62.
 Mnih V, Kavukcuoglu K, Silver D, Rusu A A, Veness J, Bellemare M
G, Graves A, Riedmiller M, Fidjeland A K, Ostrovski G, Petersen S,
Beattie  C,  Sadik  A,  Antonoglou  I,  King  H,  Kumaran  D,  Wierstra  D,
Legg S, Hassabis D. Human-level control through deep reinforcement
learning. Nature, 2015, 518(7540): 529–533
63.
 Gronauer  S,  Diepold  K.  Multi-agent  deep  reinforcement  learning:  a
survey. Artificial Intelligence Review, 2022, 55(2): 895–943
64.
 Zhang  K,  Yang  Z,  Başar  T.  Multi-agent  reinforcement  learning:  a
selective overview of theories and algorithms. In: Vamvoudakis K G,
Wan  Y,  Lewis  F  L,  Cansever  D,  eds.  Handbook  of  Reinforcement
Learning and Control. Cham: Springer, 2021, 321−384
65.
 Rashid T, Samvelyan M, Schroeder C, Farquhar G, Foerster J, Whiteson
S. QMIX: monotonic value function factorisation for deep multi-agent
reinforcement  learning.  In:  Proceedings  of  the  35th  International
Conference on Machine Learning. 2018, 4295−4304
66.
 Foerster  J,  Farquhar  G,  Afouras  T,  Nardelli  N,  Whiteson  S.
Counterfactual multi-agent policy gradients. In: Proceedings of the 32nd
AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence. 2018, 2974−2982
67.
 Fujimoto S, Hoof H, Meger D. Addressing function approximation error
in  actor-critic  methods.  In:  Proceedings  of  the  35th  International
Conference on Machine Learning. 2018, 1587−1596
68.
 Cully  A.  Autonomous  skill  discovery  with  quality-diversity  and
unsupervised  descriptors.  In:  Proceedings  of  the  Genetic  and
Evolutionary Computation Conference. 2019, 81−89
69.
 Zhou  Z,  Fu  W,  Zhang  B,  Wu  Y.  Continuously  discovering  novel
strategies via reward-switching policy optimization. In: Proceedings of
the 10th International Conference on Learning Representations. 2022
70.
 Vaswani A, Shazeer N, Parmar N, Uszkoreit J, Jones L, Gomez A N,
Kaiser Ł, Polosukhin I. Attention is all you need. In: Proceedings of the
31st  International  Conference  on  Neural  Information  Processing
Systems. 2017, 6000−6010
71.
 Zhou  Z  H.  Open-environment  machine  learning.  National  Science
Review, 2022, 9(8): nwac123
72.
Lei Yuan received the BSc degree in Department
of Electronic Engineering in 2016 from Tsinghua
University,  China  and  the  MSc  degree  from
Chinese  Aeronautical  Establishment,  China  in
2019.  He  is  currently  pursuing  the  PhD  degree
with  the  Department  of  Computer  Science  and
Technology,  Nanjing  University,  China.  His
current  research  interests  mainly  include  machine  learning,
reinforcement learning, and multi-agent reinforcement learning.
Feng Chen received his BSc degree in Automation
from  School  of  Artificial  Intelligence,  Nanjing
University,  China  in  2022.  He  is  currently
pursuing  the  MSc  degree  with  the  School  of
Artificial Intelligence, Nanjing University, China.
His
 research
 interests
 include
 multi-agent
reinforcement learning, multiagent system.
Zongzhang  Zhang  received  his  PhD  degree  in
computer science from University of Science and
Technology  of  China,  China  in  2012.  He  was  a
research  fellow  at  the  School  of  Computing,
National University of Singapore, Singapore from
2012  to  2014,  and  a  visiting  scholar  at  the
Department  of  Aeronautics  and  Astronautics,
Stanford  University,  USA  from  2018  to  2019.  He  is  currently  an
associate  professor  at  the  National  Key  Laboratory  for  Novel
Software  Technology,  Nanjing  University,  China.  He  has  co-
authored more than 50 research papers. His research interests include
reinforcement  learning,  intelligent  planning,  and  multi-agent
learning.
Yang  Yu  received  the  PhD  degree  in  computer
science from Nanjing University, China in 2011,
and  is  currently  a  professor  at  the  School  of
Artificial Intelligence, Nanjing University, China.
His  research  interests  include  machine  learning,
mainly reinforcement learning and derivative-free
optimization  for  learning.  Prof.  Yu  was  granted
the CCF-IEEE CS Young Scientist Award in 2020, recognized as one
of the AI’s 10 to Watch by IEEE Intelligent Systems, and received
the  PAKDD  Early  Career  Award  in  2018.  His  team  won  the
Champion  of  the  2018  OpenAI  Retro  Contest  on  transfer
reinforcement learning and the 2021 ICAPS Learning to Run a Power
Network  Challenge  with  Trust.  He  served  as  Area  Chairs  for
NeurIPS, ICML, IJCAI, AAAI, etc.
Lei YUAN et al.    Communication-robust multi-agent learning by adaptable auxiliary multi-agent adversary generation
17
