Less Is More: Robust Robot Learning via Partially
Observable Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning
Wenshuai Zhao∗†, Eetu-Aleksi Rantala∗‡, Sahar Salimpour‡, Joni Pajarinen†, Jorge Pe˜na-Queralta‡§
†Department of Electrical Engineering and Automation, Aalto University, Finland.
‡Turku Intelligent Embedded and Robotic Systems (TIERS) Lab, University of Turku, Finland.
§Institute of Robotics and Intelligent Systems, ETH Zurich, Switzerland.
Emails: †{wenshuai.zhao, joni.pajarinen}@aalto.fi, ‡{earant, sahars}@utu.fi, §{jorge.penaqueralta}@hest.ethz.ch
∗These authors contributed equally to this work.
Abstract— In many multi-agent and high-dimensional robotic
tasks, controllers can be optimized centrally or decentrally,
using either single-agent reinforcement learning (SARL) or multi-
agent reinforcement learning (MARL). However, the relationship
between these two paradigms is not well-studied. This work
aims to systematically investigate the robustness and performance
of SARL and MARL in the same task. We first analytically
show that independent Gaussian policies optimized by policy-
gradient based SARL and MARL are equivalent under full-
state observations. Following, we empirically show that in certain
inherently single-agent tasks, perhaps surprisingly, we can use
multiple agents to control a robot such that each agent only
has access to partial observations. Since in these cases an agent
does not depend on full state information multi-agent policies
can provide additional robustness to perturbations and failures.
Experiments on an illustrative decentralized control task and a
mobile manipulation task with a real robot show that multiple
agents with access to partial observations outperform a single
agent when parts of the system fail.
Index Terms—Robot learning; Robust learning; Multi-agent
reinforcement learning; Dec-POMDP; Mobile manipulation.
I. INTRODUCTION
Multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) provides a
paradigm where multiple agents learn simultaneously and has
been shown promising in simulated tasks and video games [1],
[2]. Nevertheless, many existing MARL benchmark tasks
can also be addressed by single-agent reinforcement learning
(SARL) with a centralized controller for all the agents given
full state observation [3]. Conversely, certain single-agent-like
tasks may be reframed as multi-agent learning problems [4],
[5]. For instance, in a classic legged-robot locomotion task,
typically controlled by a centralized controller managing all
joints, joints can be divided among different agents, allowing
MARL algorithms to learn decentralized controllers. Despite
this flexibility, the differences between these two approaches
and the criteria for choosing the optimal method for new
robotic tasks remain unclear.
Decentralized control has been extensively studied to
achieve performance comparable to centralized control in
large-scale systems [6], [7]. However, these studies often focus
on mitigating the limitations of local information in decentral-
ized controllers rather than leveraging this structure. Recent
research has demonstrated that decentralized controllers for
t0
t1
tfinal
t0
tfinal
(a) Nominal behavior
(b) Disabled manipulator
Manipulator 
agent
Base agent
Nominal
Perturbed
SARL
✔
✗
Global 
MARL
✔
✗
Partial 
MARL (ours)
✔
✔
Fig. 1: Our real mobile manipulator experiments examine the ro-
bustness of learned controllers via three different methods: (i) SARL,
(ii) MARL (global) and (iii) MARL (partial). In the setting shown
in Figure (a), both the mobile base and the manipulator arm work
normally while in (b) the manipulator is disabled to test the robustness
of learned controllers. The results in different settings in the bottom
right table show that although all three methods can work well
with nominal behaviors, only MARL (partial) succeeds when the
manipulator is disabled, demonstrating improved robustness of the
controller empowered by partially observable MARL.
complex robotic systems can achieve similar or even superior
performance and robustness compared to centralized con-
trollers [8], [9], [10]. Nonetheless, these studies are typically
confined to specific simulated tasks and do not provide a
general investigation of design choices. In this paper, we
adopt perspectives from both control theory and reinforcement
learning to comprehensively explore design choices for decen-
tralized and centralized control. We propose that multi-agent
reinforcement learning (MARL) offers a flexible approach for
designing decentralized controllers with local observations,
potentially enhancing the robustness of robotic systems against
component failures.
We start by analytically showing the equivalence between
SARL and MARL under global full observation conditions.
Our empirical experiments on two toy MARL tasks further in-
dicate that MARL with limited local observations can achieve
performance comparable to that with full observations. Addi-
tionally, we provide an illustrative example with proportional-
integral (PI) control, highlighting the instability caused by
centralized controllers with global information. Finally, in
arXiv:2309.14792v2  [cs.RO]  28 Feb 2025

experiments with a real-world mobile manipulation robot,
our decentralized MARL controllers with local observations
exhibit improved robustness to agent failure, as shown in
Fig. 1. We hope this systematic investigation provides valuable
insights for the design of general robotic system control.
The remainder of this document is organized as follows.
Section II introduces the state of the art in MARL and robotics
use cases. Section III then describes the background concepts
for Dec-MDP and Dec-POMDP. We introduce the equivalence
between SARL and MARL in Section IV and empirically
show the near-optimal performance of MARL agents with
limited observations in Section V. Section VI provides an
illustrative example to analytically show the robustness via de-
centralized PI controllers. Section VII describes our real robot
experiments. We conclude the work and outline limitations in
Section VIII.
II. RELATED WORK
We first introduce the common MARL methods and then
specify works dealing with partial observation. Finally, we
discuss current works using MARL for robotic tasks.
A. Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning
Deep multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) has ex-
hibited success in various game tasks [11], such as StarCraft
II [2] and Stratego [12]. Value decomposition methods [13],
[14] and recent multi-agent policy gradient (MAPG) meth-
ods [15], [16], [1] have demonstrated significant performance
across various benchmarks [3], [5], [2]. One notable example
is the Multi-agent Mujoco (Ma-MuJoCo) [5] domain which
splits the joints of Mujoco robot tasks [17] into different agents
and formulates it as a multi-agent cooperative task. Although
such Mujoco tasks were traditionally used to benchmark
single-agent RL methods, MARL approaches also show com-
petitive performance. Therefore, it motivates us to investigate
the connection between MARL and SARL paradigms and their
applicability to complex robotic systems.
B. Partially Observable MARL
Similar to studies in classical decentralized control the-
ory [7], the existing literature on the partial observation
problem in MARL primarily focuses on mitigating the impact
of partial observation. This is typically achieved by sharing
more information [18] or approximating the underlying full-
state belief through various methods, such as the mean-field
method [19] and agent modeling [20]. In contrast, inspired
by the finding that many multi-agent learning problems can
be locally independent and require only local information for
near-optimal performance [6], [21], we propose leveraging
the inherent structure of complex robot tasks to harness the
potential of partial observation.
C. MARL for Robotics
MARL methods have been naturally used in multi-robot
control tasks [22], [23], [24] due to their intrinsic decentralized
control mechanism. However, some robot tasks can adopt
Fig. 2: Centralized controller πc (left) with full observation vs.
decentralized controllers πi (right) with local observations.
either SARL or MARL methods to learn controllers. For
example, in bi-arm manipulation, studies such as [25] and [26]
employ MARL methods to learn decentralized controllers,
whereas works like [27] and recent imitation learning stud-
ies [28], [29] develop a centralized controller for all arms.
Most existing works predominantly use centralized controllers
for mobile manipulation [30], [31], and few studies have
explored the comparative advantages of MARL over SARL
when both approaches are applicable. The closest work to
ours [9] compares SARL and MARL methods for in-hand
manipulation. However, unlike our approach, they allow the
decentralized controllers to observe the neighbor agents’
actions, which provides critical information for the agents
to adapt to malfunctions compared to SARL baselines. In
this paper, we instead seek the benefits of using less state
information with MARL and comprehensively investigate the
connection between SARL and MARL.
III. PROBLEM FORMULATION
We study the fully cooperative multi-agent sequential
decision-making tasks which can be formulated as a decen-
tralized Markov decision process (Dec-MDP) [32] represented
as a tuple (S, {Ai}i∈N , r, P, γ). N = {1, · · · , n} denotes a
set of agents. At time step t of, each agent i observes the
full state st in the state space S of the environment and
performs an action ai
t in the action space Ai from its policy
πi(·|st). The joint policy consists of all the individual policies
π(·|st) = π1 × · · · × πn. The environment takes the joint
action of all agents at = {a1
t, · · · , an
t }, changes its state
following the dynamics function P : S × A × S 7→[0, 1]
and generates a common reward r : S × A 7→R for all the
agents. γ ∈[0, 1) is a reward discount factor. The agents
learn their individual policies and maximize the expected
return: π∗= arg maxπ Es,a∼π,P[P∞
t=0 γtr(st, at)]. When
agents only partially observe the state, the problem can be
reformulated as decentralized partially observable Markov
decision process (Dec-POMDP) [33] where agents can only
access partial observation Oi from the full state S.
In this work, we explore the properties of controllers learned
via SARL and MARL for the same robot task. As illustrated
in Fig. 2, the centralized controller πc takes all the information
and outputs all actions with one controller. By contrast, we can
also design a set of decentralized controllers with different

local observations for separate action dimensions. We seek
to systematically analyze and compare these two approaches
for control design, from perspectives of both classical control
theory and reinforcement learning.
IV. EQUIVALENCE BETWEEN SARL AND MARL
SARL and MARL are typically investigated independently.
Here, we analytically establish their equivalence with policy
gradient methods [34] under two mild assumptions. This
explicit connection serves as the foundation to investigate the
conditions under which they diverge and how we can leverage
the unique advantages offered by MARL.
Assumption 1. We make the following assumptions to ana-
lytically build the connection between SARL and MARL:
1. Both SARL and MARL take the full state observation;
2. SARL adopts a Gaussian distribution policy with diag-
onal covariance for continuous action space or inde-
pendent multivariate categorical distribution for discrete
action space.
The policy gradient with SARL is estimated as follows:
∂J
∂θ = E(s,a)∼π[∇θ log πθ(a|s)A(s, a))],
(1)
in which J is the objective we target to maximize, J =
E(s,a)∼π[P∞
t=0 rt(s, a)], and A(s, a) denotes the advantage
estimation [35]. Similarly, MARL estimates the policy gradient
for each agent following:
∂J
∂θi = E(s,ai)∼πi[∇θi log πθi(ai|s)A(s, ai))].
(2)
In the Dec-MDP framework, agents share the same reward
for all the interactions, and based on the first Assumption 1
of full state observation si = s, we know the value function
and sample-based advantage estimation satisfy
V (si) = V (s), and A(si, ai) = A(s, a)
(3)
at each time step. Based on the second Assumption 1, the
joint action probability equals the product of probabilities of
individual action on each dimension π(a|s) = QN
i=1 π(ai|s).
It is easy to get:
∇θ log πθ(a|s)A(s, a) =
N
X
i=0
∇θ log πθ(ai|s)A(s, ai),
(4)
which is simply the sum of the policy gradient on each agent
in MARL. As such, we can conclude that the policy gradients
between SARL and MARL are mathematically equivalent
under Assumption 1.
V. DOES PARTIAL OBSERVABILITY AFFECT
MULTI-AGENT LEARNING?
By highlighting the aforementioned equivalence, we argue
that the key advantage induced by MARL arises from flexible
local observation settings for different agents. Although severe
partial observation may degrade policy learning [36], in many
Fig. 3: Illustration of two common multi-agent tasks. Left: MPE
Simple-Spread task, where 8 agents (purple circles) need to cover
8 landmarks (black dots). Right: Pursuit task where the red agents
need to cooperate to surround the blue evaders. The gray block is an
obstacle agents cannot traverse. The orange dashed squares in both
tasks denote the partial observation range of one agent.
Dec-POMDP tasks, local observation is sufficient for near-
optimal performance [37], [6], [21]. In this section, we em-
pirically show, on two popular MARL toy tasks MPE Simple-
Spread [38] and Pursuit [3], that agents are capable of making
near-optimal decisions with limited local observation1.
As shown in the left of Fig. 3, MPE
Simple-Spread has
a set of agents to cover all the landmarks as closely as
possible. The shared reward is the negation of the sum of the
minimum distances between each landmark and the closest
agents. An additional penalty is given for collisions. In this
task, each agent can only observe the velocity of its own
and the relative positions of k neighborhood agents. In our
experiments, we test four different amounts of closet agents
that can be observed, i.e. k ∈{2, 4, 6, 8}.
The Pursuit task shown on the right of Fig. 3 requires the
pursuers (red dots) to coordinate to surround the evaders (blue
dots). There are at least two agents needed to capture one
evader. The agents are rewarded when any evader is success-
fully captured and the evader will disappear. A slight guiding
reward is designed when agents tag any evader and an urgency
penalty is also used to encourage agents to complete the task as
soon as possible. In both tasks, the final reward is accumulated
and shared by all the agents. An agent observes the information
around itself in a square with a fixed size. Each square has
three channels. For example, [3, 7, 7] represents the occupancy
of grid cells by pursuers, evaders, and obstacles, respectively.
We use three different observation ranges k ∈{7, 10, 14}.
We employ multi-agent PPO (MAPPO) [1] as our policy
learning method. MAPPO works in a similar way as inde-
pendent PPO [16] except that MAPPO learns the critic using
a concatenated global state in order to stabilize the learning
process. However, during execution, the agent only uses its
local observations. The learning curves are shown in Fig. 4.
The consistently close performance across different observa-
tion ranges indicates that in these tasks, quite limited partial
observation is sufficient to perform near-optimal decision-
making. Therefore, based on this empirical evidence, we are
1Code: https://github.com/TIERS/partially-observable-marl

0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
Environment Steps
1e7
1500
1000
500
Episode Return
SimpleSpread
obs_range
2
4
6
8
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
Environment Steps
1e7
200
100
0
100
Pursuit
obs_range
7
10
14
Fig. 4: Evaluation performance on MPE Simple-Spread (left) and Pursuit (right). We test different observation settings varying in {2, 4, 6, 8}
and {7, 10, 14} in Simple-Spread and Pursuit, respectively. The performance is comparable in a relatively large range of different observation
settings. We plot the average return over 5 random seeds and the shaded areas denote 95% confidence intervals.
motivated to explore the advantages equipped by partially
observable MARL or decentralized control.
VI. ROBUSTNESS ARISING FROM DECENTRALIZED
CONTROL
This section presents an illustrative example comparing the
robustness of decentralized proportional-integral (PI) control
with local observations and centralized controllers with global
observations. The robustness is specifically analyzed w.r.t.
system disturbances. Consider an interconnected power sys-
tem [39], [7] with two generators supplying power to areas A
and B, respectively. The target is to design a controller for each
generator i to output power ui to lower the power frequency
deviation due to disturbance ni(t). Note that the power can
be transferred between the two areas through a tie-line. Each
area i follows the dynamics:
d(∆fi)
dt
= −Di
Mi
∆fi + 1
Mi
(Pi −ni(t) ± T12(∆f1 −∆f2))
dPi
dt = −1
Tgi
Pi + Kgi
Tgi
ui,
where Pi and fi denote the power generation and frequency of
generator i. Di, Mi denote the damping and inertia coefficients
of Area i, while Tgi and Kgi denote the time constant and
gain factor of a generator. We denote the tie-line power flow
coefficient between Area 1 and Area 2 as T12 with ± meaning
minus for Area 1 while plus for Area 2. ∆fi represents
the frequency deviation, whose absolute value |∆fi| is the
objective we aim to minimize.
We compare the robustness of decentralized and centralized
PI controllers. The decentralized controllers are:
u1 = −KP
d1∆f1 −KI
d1
Z t
0
(∆f1)dτ
u2 = −KP
d2∆f2 −KI
d2
Z t
0
(∆f2)dτ,
where KP and KI denote the proportional gain and integral
gain with the subscript di as the generator index of decentral-
ized controller i. In contrast, centralized controllers observe
frequency deviations of both generators, i.e., ∆f1 and ∆f2.
Note that the coefficients KP
c2, KI
c2 in u1 are non-zeros, which
also applies to KP
c1, KI
c1 in u2:
u1=−KP
c1∆f1−KI
c1
Z t
0
∆f1dτ−KP
c2∆f2−KI
c2
Z t
0
∆f2dτ
u2=−KP
c1∆f1−KI
c1
Z t
0
∆f1dτ−KP
c2∆f2−KI
c2
Z t
0
∆f2dτ,
where KP
c1 represents the proportional gain of the centralized
controller of generator 1 and other symbols follow the same
rule. In our experiments, we only disturb Area 1 by a step
function since t = 1, i.e., n1(t) = 1 if t ≥1, else 0. We do
not disturb Area 2, i.e., n2(t) = 0 while t ≥0. The detailed
hyper-parameters of each controller are left in Appendix A.
Figure 5 presents the frequency deviations of each area
induced by different controllers. The results indicate that
decentralized controllers significantly reduce frequency devia-
tions. In contrast, centralized controllers introduce substantial
disturbances in ∆f2, despite Area 2 not being directly affected.
This outcome is expected as the decentralized controller with
local observations can naturally disregard disturbances to non-
local observations, improving the decentralized controller’s
robustness with non-disturbed observations. It is noteworthy
that this control design can be generalized to other control
systems, such as modular and swarm robots, which motivates
us to explore partially observable multi-agent reinforcement
learning (MARL) for complex robotic systems.
VII. REAL ROBOT TASK: MOBILE MANIPULATOR REACH
This section examines the robustness of partially observable
MARL on a modular real robot, where a mobile manipulator
learns to reach a certain point. The mobile manipulator con-
sists of a Clearpath Husky base (the base agent) and a Franka

0.0
2.5
5.0
7.5
10.0
12.5
15.0
17.5
20.0
Time [s]
0.04
0.02
0.00
0.02
0.04
Frequency Deviation [Hz]
Comparison of Robustness to Disturbance
f1 Decentralized
f2 Decentralized
f1 Centralized
f2 Centralized
Fig. 5: Comparison of the robustness of decentralized PI controllers
and a centralized PI controller on the two-area interconnected power
system.
Panda 6-DoF manipulator (the manipulator agent), as shown
in Fig. 1.
A. Experimental Setup
We consider three experimental settings to compare the
different approaches in terms of SARL vs. MARL policies,
and global vs. partial observability in the MARL cases. These
are (1) nominal conditions; (2) disablement of the manipu-
lation agent; and (3) disablement of the manipulation agent
with additional perturbation of its initial state. In each of the
three setups, we compare a SARL baseline with our global
and partial MARL policies, all running in real time on the
robots. We also set three target points at absolute positions
of p1 = (0.4, −0.6, 0.5), p2 = (0.3, 2.0, 0.7), and p3 =
(−2.0, −1.0, 0.4). These are defined to force both forward and
backward motions of the base, as well as rotations.
B. Task and Model Definitions
The observation space depends on the method. The full
state information (sbase, sarm, see, starget) is available for the
SARL and global MARL policies. For the partial MARL,
the base agent observes (sbase, see, starget) and the mobile
agent observes (sarm, see, starget). The mobile base’s state
sbase ∈R3 is its translation in x and y coordinates relative
to the starting position of the base and its yaw in the global
frame. The manipulator’s state sarm ∈R18 is composed of its
current joint angles and angular velocities of each of its joints.
The manipulator’s end effector’s position see ∈R3, and the
target position starget ∈R3. The positions see and starget are
relative to the starting position of the base.
The action space for the agents are the linear and angular
velocity commands for the base (abase x, abase yaw) and the
joint commands for the manipulator aarm ∈R9 which control
the desired change for the joint angles. All the actions are
continuous and are clipped to a range of [−1, 1].
The reward function is defined to minimize the distance
from the end effector to the target point. For this, we use the
following exponential function rd = exp(−α∥starget −see∥),
where α ≥0 is a scalar. We also design a function rl that
penalizes joint configurations that differ excessively from the
neutral configuration to avoid reaching joint limits or destabi-
lizing the robot. Finally, we define an additional component rd
to penalize large actions. The complete reward is then given
by r = wdrd −wprp −wlrl, with weights wp, wd, wl ≥0.
The implementation details are available in GitHub2.
C. Policy Training
We use a PPO implementation from the RLGames library
which supports multiple agents [40] to train our robot policies.
For SARL and global MARL we use a single multi-layer
perceptron (MLP) with separate output heads for policies and
value functions. For partial MARL, we use two separate MLPs
instead. It is worth noting that input size varies across the three
methods.
The robot policy is trained in NVIDIA Isaac Sim [41],
shown in Fig. 7. The simulation runs at 120 Hz while the
RL interaction runs at 60 Hz. We set the maximum length
of the episode to 500 steps. Note that all three policies are
trained with the same simulation setup. The training results
are shown in Fig. 8, where we can see that all three policies
achieve satisfactory results and comparable returns, consistent
with the multi-agent results in Section V.
D. Results
After the policy trained in Isaac Sim, we perform both Sim-
to-Real and Sim-to-Sim experiments to examine the robustness
of policies learned by three different methods. In Sim-to-Real,
we deploy the learned policies to a real mobile manipulator
robot and compare the robustness to perturbations and agent
failure. We further extensively test the robustness on a simu-
lated robot in Gazebo [42], as our Sim-to-Sim experiment. Note
that the experiments are all performed without fine-tuning. In
both experiments, we observe consistently improved robust-
ness of the learned policy via partially observable MARL.
1) Real-world: In the real-robot experiments, the trained
model weights are exported and integrated into a ROS Noetic
node. The base agent controller runs in a Jetson AGX Xavier
onboard computer, while the manipulator agent controller runs
in an Up Xtreme board with an Intel i7 processor. Ground truth
and joint poses are obtained with an Optitrack Motion Capture
system. Poses are only given to the base and the arm’s end
effector, in addition to the target. The rest of joints representing
observable states are defined only by their orientation. The
experimental platform is illustrated in Fig. 9.
The experiment results are summarized in Fig. 6. In the first
set of experiments with the nominal behavior of both agents
as shown in Fig. 6a, the SARL baseline performs the best and
is able to get the closest to the target point. However, the
reduced performance margin with MARL (global) is minimal.
Importantly, even with limited observation, MARL (partial)
reaches near-optimal performance for these experiments.
In the second set of experiments shown in Fig. 6b, we
disable the manipulator agent entirely. The results show that
MARL (partial) outperforms the baselines by reaching the
2Code: https://github.com/TIERS/isaac-marl-mobile-manipulation

0
1
2
3
Dist. to target (m)
TARGET 1
TARGET 2
TARGET 3
SARL
MARL (global)
MARL (partial)
(a)
0
1
2
3
Dist. to target (m)
(b)
0
10
20
30
40
0
1
2
3
Time (s)
Dist. to target (m)
0
10
20
30
40
Time (s)
0
10
20
30
40
Time (s)
(c)
Fig. 6: Experimental results with a real-world mobile manipulator (a) under nominal conditions, (b) with the manipulator agent disabled, and
(c) with the manipulator agent disabled, and also its initial position perturbed. Our experiments show all policies are able to complete the task
under nominal conditions in (a). However, if one of the agents fails to move, as the manipulator in (b), the decentralized MARL approach
that uses global observations for all agents fails. Finally, (c) shows that convergence is only accomplished with the partially observable
MARL policy when a higher level of disturbance occurs. Therefore, our solution enables higher system robustness.
closest distances to the targets. Additionally, we observe that
the MARL (global) baseline diverges in all three experimen-
tal trials, whereas SARL exhibits superior performance. We
hypothesize that this disparity is due to MARL (global) com-
prising two policy networks with full state dimensions, which
likely requires more data for training to reach a performance
level comparable to SARL.
The third experiment introduces an additional perturbation
to the initial state of the manipulator, resulting in a different
setup from the training process. In these experiments shown
in Fig. 6c, MARL (partial) consistently outperforms the other
two baselines, with the SARL policy not always being able to
converge. This result suggests that introducing partial observ-
ability to the agents increases the robustness to perturbations
to the system such as dysfunction of some agents.
2) Gazebo Simulator: Despite the real-world experiments,
we thoroughly evaluate the observed results by deploying the
policies on a simulated robot in Gazebo [42], as depicted
in Fig. 10. Following the real-world experiments setup, we
repeat each experiment 10 times using the Husky manipulation
simulation package. In each repetition, we slightly randomize
the target points, such that the target point is uniformly
distributed within a 0.5 × 0.5 × 0.5 m3 box. The results are
summarized in Fig. 11.
In the first set of experiments with nominal agents shown in
Fig. ??, all three methods achieve target points. In the second
set, where the manipulator agent is disabled, the results mirror
the real-world results: MARL (global) consistently diverge,

Fig. 7: Illustration of the training process in NVIDIA Isaac Sim with
Isaac Gym using 512 parallel environments.
0
200
400
600
1000
1200
1400
800
100
Episode return
SARL 
MARL (global)
MARL (partial)
0
-100
-200
 Training epoch
-300
-400
Fig. 8: Episodic returns during training using Isaac Sim.
while the SARL policy demonstrates relative success across
all three targets. The proposed MARL (partial) shows the
best performance, as shown in Fig. ??. In the third set of
experiments shown in Fig. ??, with an additional perturbation
of the initial state of the manipulator agent, MARL (partial)
is the only method that consistently succeeds.
Extensive repeated experiments conducted in the Gazebo
simulation environment underscore the enhanced robustness
of the tested mobile manipulator robot when employing
partially observable MARL. The findings demonstrate that
well-designed decentralized controllers, utilizing local obser-
vations—whether through direct control methods or learned
via MARL—can offer a cheap approach to achieving supe-
rior robustness compared to centralized controllers with full
observation capabilities.
VIII. CONCLUSION AND LIMITATIONS
Multi-agent reinforcement learning has arisen as a potential
paradigm for controlling not only multiple, but also individual
complex robots that have been previously modeled as a single
agent. In this study, we comprehensively explore the potential
benefits and drawbacks of MARL and SARL control policies.
We analytically examine the relationship between these two
paradigms and empirically show that agents with partial obser-
vation can make near-optimal decisions. Particularly, we study
Fig. 9: Mobile manipulator used in real-world experiments with a
Clearpath Husky as a base and a Panda Emika Panda manipulator.
Fig. 10: The left shows the mobile manipulator in the nominal
position, while the right shows the robot with a perturbed initial
position. The red dashed line highlights the changed position of the
end-effector.
the advantage of partially observable MARL and decentralized
control. Our results on decentralized PI controllers and real-
world mobile manipulator tasks indicate enhanced robustness
with partial observation, which may inspire more general
robust control designs.
However, our work has several limitations and offers op-
portunities for future improvement. First, our real-world ex-
periments are limited in scope and could be extended to
more complex tasks with critical robustness requirements.
Second, it would be beneficial to formally identify the specific
robot systems to which our empirical findings are applicable.
Third, while we empirically demonstrate improved robustness
through partial observation, there is still a need for a principled
approach to designing observation spaces for decentralized
controllers.

0
1
2
3
4
5
Dist. to target (m)
TARGET 1
TARGET 2
TARGET 3
SARL
MARL (global)
MARL (partial)
(a)
0
1
2
3
4
5
Dist. to target (m)
(b)
0
10
20
30
40
0
1
2
3
4
5
Time (s)
Dist. to target (m)
0
10
20
30
40
Time (s)
0
10
20
30
40
Time (s)
Fig. 11: Sim-to-Sim results in Gazebo. Experiments on each target are repeated 10 times with slightly perturbed target points. The simulated
robot is experimented with (a) nominal conditions, (b) the manipulator agent disabled, and (c) the manipulator agent disabled and its initial
position perturbed. Under nominal conditions (a), all policies complete the task. In (b), the MARL approach with global observations fails.
And, only the partially observable MARL policy achieves convergence in (c).
APPENDIX
A. Implementation Details
The hyper-parameters used in the two-area interconnected
power system are listed in Table I.
REFERENCES
[1] C. Yu, A. Velu, E. Vinitsky, J. Gao, Y. Wang, A. Bayen, and Y. Wu,
“The surprising effectiveness of ppo in cooperative multi-agent games,”
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, vol. 35, pp. 24611–
24624, 2022.
[2] O. Vinyals, I. Babuschkin, W. M. Czarnecki, M. Mathieu, A. Dudzik,
J. Chung, D. H. Choi, R. Powell, T. Ewalds, P. Georgiev, et al., “Grand-
master level in starcraft ii using multi-agent reinforcement learning,”
Nature, vol. 575, no. 7782, pp. 350–354, 2019.
[3] J. Terry, B. Black, N. Grammel, M. Jayakumar, A. Hari, R. Sullivan,
L. S. Santos, C. Dieffendahl, C. Horsch, R. Perez-Vicente, et al.,
“Pettingzoo: Gym for multi-agent reinforcement learning,” Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems, vol. 34, pp. 15032–15043, 2021.
[4] C. S. de Witt, B. Peng, P.-A. Kamienny, P. Torr, W. B¨ohmer, and
S. Whiteson, “Deep multi-agent reinforcement learning for decentral-
ized continuous cooperative control,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.06709,
vol. 19, 2020.
[5] B. Peng, T. Rashid, C. Schroeder de Witt, P.-A. Kamienny, P. Torr,
W. B¨ohmer, and S. Whiteson, “Facmac: Factored multi-agent centralised
policy gradients,” Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
vol. 34, pp. 12208–12221, 2021.
[6] J. Lavaei, “Decentralized implementation of centralized controllers for
interconnected systems,” IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control,
vol. 57, no. 7, pp. 1860–1865, 2011.
[7] E. J. Davison, A. G. Aghdam, and D. E. Miller, Decentralized control
of large-scale systems. Springer, 2020.
[8] M. Schilling, K. Konen, F. W. Ohl, and T. Korthals, “Decentralized deep
reinforcement learning for a distributed and adaptive locomotion con-
troller of a hexapod robot,” in 2020 IEEE/RSJ International Conference
on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS), pp. 5335–5342, IEEE, 2020.
[9] L. Tao, J. Zhang, M. Bowman, and X. Zhang, “A multi-agent approach
for adaptive finger cooperation in learning-based in-hand manipulation,”
in 2023 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation
(ICRA), pp. 3897–3903, IEEE, 2023.

TABLE I: Hyper-Parameters of Interconnected Power System
Parameter
Symbol
Value
Inertia coefficient of Area 1
M1
10
Inertia coefficient of Area 2
M2
10
Damping coefficient of Area 1
D1
1
Damping coefficient of Area 2
D2
1
Time constant of generator in Area 1
Tg1
0.5
Time constant of generator in Area 2
Tg2
0.5
Gain of generator in Area 1
Kg1
1
Gain of generator in Area 2
Kg2
1
Tie-line power flow coefficient
T12
0.1
Proportional gain for Area 1 (decentralized)
KP
d1
1
Integral gain for Area 1 (decentralized)
KI
d1
0.5
Proportional gain for Area 2 (decentralized)
KP
d2
1
Integral gain for Area 2 (decentralized)
KI
d2
0.5
Proportional gain for Area 1 (centralized)
KP
c1
1
Integral gain for Area 1 (centralized)
KI
c1
0.5
Proportional gain for Area 2 (centralized)
KP
c2
1
Integral gain for Area 2 (centralized)
KI
c2
0.5
[10] Y. Guo, Z. Jiang, Y.-J. Wang, J. Gao, and J. Chen, “Decentralized
motor skill learning for complex robotic systems,” IEEE Robotics and
Automation Letters, 2023.
[11] S. Gronauer and K. Diepold, “Multi-agent deep reinforcement learning:
a survey,” Artificial Intelligence Review, pp. 1–49, 2022.
[12] J. Perolat, B. De Vylder, D. Hennes, E. Tarassov, F. Strub, V. de Boer,
P. Muller, J. T. Connor, N. Burch, T. Anthony, et al., “Mastering the
game of stratego with model-free multiagent reinforcement learning,”
Science, vol. 378, no. 6623, pp. 990–996, 2022.
[13] P. Sunehag, G. Lever, A. Gruslys, W. M. Czarnecki, V. Zambaldi,
M. Jaderberg, M. Lanctot, N. Sonnerat, J. Z. Leibo, K. Tuyls, et al.,
“Value-decomposition networks for cooperative multi-agent learning,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:1706.05296, 2017.
[14] T. Rashid, M. Samvelyan, C. S. De Witt, G. Farquhar, J. Foerster,
and S. Whiteson, “Monotonic value function factorisation for deep
multi-agent reinforcement learning,” The Journal of Machine Learning
Research, vol. 21, no. 1, pp. 7234–7284, 2020.
[15] J. Foerster, G. Farquhar, T. Afouras, N. Nardelli, and S. Whiteson,
“Counterfactual multi-agent policy gradients,” in Proceedings of the
AAAI conference on artificial intelligence, vol. 32, 2018.
[16] C. S. de Witt, T. Gupta, D. Makoviichuk, V. Makoviychuk, P. H. Torr,
M. Sun, and S. Whiteson, “Is independent learning all you need in
the starcraft multi-agent challenge?,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2011.09533,
2020.
[17] G. Brockman, V. Cheung, L. Pettersson, J. Schneider, J. Schul-
man, J. Tang, and W. Zaremba, “Openai gym,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1606.01540, 2016.
[18] X. Liu and K. Zhang, “Partially observable multi-agent rl with (quasi-
) efficiency: the blessing of information sharing,” in International
Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 22370–22419, PMLR, 2023.
[19] K. He, P. Doshi, and B. Banerjee, “Many agent reinforcement learning
under partial observability,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.09825, 2021.
[20] G. Papoudakis, F. Christianos, and S. Albrecht, “Agent modelling under
partial observability for deep reinforcement learning,” Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems, vol. 34, pp. 19210–19222, 2021.
[21] A. DeWeese and G. Qu, “Locally interdependent multi-agent mdp: Theo-
retical framework for decentralized agents with dynamic dependencies,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.06823, 2024.
[22] M. Jana, L. Vachhani, and A. Sinha, “A deep reinforcement learning
approach for multi-agent mobile robot patrolling,” International Journal
of Intelligent Robotics and Applications, vol. 6, no. 4, pp. 724–745,
2022.
[23] D. L. Leottau, J. Ruiz-del Solar, and R. Babuˇska, “Decentralized rein-
forcement learning of robot behaviors,” Artificial Intelligence, vol. 256,
pp. 130–159, 2018.
[24] W. Zhao, J. P. Queralta, and T. Westerlund, “Sim-to-real transfer in deep
reinforcement learning for robotics: a survey,” in 2020 IEEE symposium
series on computational intelligence (SSCI), pp. 737–744, IEEE, 2020.
[25] L. Liu, Q. Liu, Y. Song, B. Pang, X. Yuan, and Q. Xu, “A collabo-
rative control method of dual-arm robots based on deep reinforcement
learning,” Applied Sciences, vol. 11, no. 4, p. 1816, 2021.
[26] G. Ding, J. J. Koh, K. Merckaert, B. Vanderborght, M. M. Nicotra,
C. Heckman, A. Roncone, and L. Chen, “Distributed reinforcement
learning for cooperative multi-robot object manipulation,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2003.09540, 2020.
[27] R. Chitnis, S. Tulsiani, S. Gupta, and A. Gupta, “Efficient bimanual
manipulation using learned task schemas,” in 2020 IEEE International
Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), pp. 1149–1155, IEEE,
2020.
[28] T. Z. Zhao, V. Kumar, S. Levine, and C. Finn, “Learning fine-
grained bimanual manipulation with low-cost hardware,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2304.13705, 2023.
[29] L. X. Shi, A. Sharma, T. Z. Zhao, and C. Finn, “Waypoint-
based imitation learning for robotic manipulation,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2307.14326, 2023.
[30] N. Yokoyama, A. W. Clegg, E. Undersander, S. Ha, D. Batra, and A. Rai,
“Adaptive skill coordination for robotic mobile manipulation,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2304.00410, 2023.
[31] C. Wang, Q. Zhang, Q. Tian, S. Li, X. Wang, D. Lane, Y. Petillot, and
S. Wang, “Learning mobile manipulation through deep reinforcement
learning,” Sensors, vol. 20, no. 3, p. 939, 2020.
[32] D. S. Bernstein, R. Givan, N. Immerman, and S. Zilberstein, “The
complexity of decentralized control of markov decision processes,”
Mathematics of operations research, vol. 27, no. 4, pp. 819–840, 2002.
[33] C. Amato, G. Chowdhary, A. Geramifard, N. K.
¨Ure, and M. J.
Kochenderfer, “Decentralized control of partially observable markov
decision processes,” in 52nd IEEE Conference on Decision and Control,
pp. 2398–2405, IEEE, 2013.
[34] V. Mnih, A. P. Badia, M. Mirza, A. Graves, T. Lillicrap, T. Harley,
D. Silver, and K. Kavukcuoglu, “Asynchronous methods for deep rein-
forcement learning,” in International conference on machine learning,
pp. 1928–1937, PMLR, 2016.
[35] J. Schulman, P. Moritz, S. Levine, M. Jordan, and P. Abbeel, “High-
dimensional continuous control using generalized advantage estimation,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:1506.02438, 2015.
[36] Q. Liu, A. Chung, C. Szepesv´ari, and C. Jin, “When is partially ob-
servable reinforcement learning not scary?,” in Conference on Learning
Theory, pp. 5175–5220, PMLR, 2022.
[37] S. Witwicki and E. Durfee, “Influence-based policy abstraction for
weakly-coupled dec-pomdps,” in Proceedings of the international con-
ference on automated planning and scheduling, vol. 20, pp. 185–192,
2010.
[38] R. Lowe, Y. I. Wu, A. Tamar, J. Harb, O. Pieter Abbeel, and I. Mordatch,
“Multi-agent actor-critic for mixed cooperative-competitive environ-
ments,” Advances in neural information processing systems, vol. 30,
2017.
[39] E. Davison and N. Tripathi, “The optimal decentralized control of a
large power system: Load and frequency control,” IEEE Transactions
on Automatic Control, vol. 23, no. 2, pp. 312–325, 1978.
[40] D. Makoviichuk and V. Makoviychuk, “rl-games: A high-performance
framework for reinforcement learning.” https://github.com/Denys88/rl
games, May 2021.
[41] NVIDIA, “Nvidia isaac sim.” https://developer.nvidia.com/isaac-sim.
Accessed: 2023-09.
[42] N. Koenig and A. Howard, “Design and use paradigms for gazebo,
an open-source multi-robot simulator,” in 2004 IEEE/RSJ international
conference on intelligent robots and systems (IROS)(IEEE Cat. No.
04CH37566), vol. 3, pp. 2149–2154, Ieee, 2004.
