IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SMART GRID, VOL. 15, NO. 6, NOVEMBER 2024
5761
Attention-Enhanced Multi-Agent Reinforcement
Learning Against Observation Perturbations
for Distributed Volt-VAR Control
Xu Yang
, Graduate Student Member, IEEE, Haotian Liu, and Wenchuan Wu
, Fellow, IEEE
Abstract—The cloud-edge collaboration architecture has been
widely adopted for distributed Volt-VAR control (VVC) prob-
lems
in
active
distribution
networks
(ADNs).
To
alleviate
the computation and communication burden on edge sides,
centralized training & decentralized execution (CTDE) based
multi-agent reinforcement learning methods have been proposed.
However, the performance of these methods relies heavily on
the agents’ coordination mechanism and accurate observations.
Given access to a vast amount of distributed energy resources, it
becomes increasingly challenging to achieve efﬁcient coordination
within CTDE framework. Furthermore, the agents’ observations
always involve perturbations such as measurement noises and
even cyber-attacks in real-world ADNs, which can signiﬁcantly
degrade the distributed VVC performance and may cause
severe security issues. In this paper, we propose an attention-
enhanced multi-agent reinforcement learning method to address
observation perturbations for distributed VVC. In our proposed
method, a mix network on the cloud platform with an agent-
level attention mechanism is used to approximate the global
reward, successfully capturing the intercorrelations between
agents and achieving excellent coordination. A novel robust
regularizer is also designed to enhance the agents’ robustness
facing the observation perturbations, which greatly improves
the applicability of reinforcement learning methods. Numerical
simulations on IEEE test cases with real-world data demonstrate
the effectiveness and robustness of our proposed method.
Index
Terms—Voltage
control,
cloud-edge
collaboration,
centralized training & decentralized execution, multi-agent rein-
forcement learning, attention mechanism, robust regularizer.
I. INTRODUCTION
W
ITH increasing penetration of distributed renewable
energy resources in the power system, voltage viola-
tions and high network losses are becoming more serious in
active distribution networks (ADNs) [1], [2]. To alleviate the
problems, Volt-VAR control (VVC) has become an important
Manuscript received 6 November 2023; revised 29 February 2024 and
22 May 2024; accepted 23 June 2024. Date of publication 5 July 2024;
date of current version 23 October 2024. This work was supported in
part by the National Key Research and Development Plan of China under
Grant 2022YFB2402900, and in part by the S&T Program of State Grid
Corporation of China under Grant 52060023001T. Paper no. TSG-01866-
2023. (Corresponding author: Wenchuan Wu.)
The authors are with the State Key Laboratory of Power Systems,
Department
of
Electrical
Engineering,
Tsinghua
University,
Beijing
100084, China (e-mail: yangxuthu@163.com; liuhaotian@tsinghua.edu.cn;
wuwench@tsinghua.edu.cn).
Color versions of one or more ﬁgures in this article are available at
https://doi.org/10.1109/TSG.2024.3423700.
Digital Object Identiﬁer 10.1109/TSG.2024.3423700
part of real-time dispatch of the ADNs [3]. Given that most
of the renewable energy resources are connected to the grid
by inverters, they are able and required to provide additional
reactive power support to stabilize the voltage proﬁle.
Till now, VVC is usually formulated as a nonlinear pro-
gramming problem that can be efﬁciently solved by some
mature centralized optimization methods such as interior
point method [4]. However, these centralized VVC methods
require a complete model and global measurements of the
ADN, which may suffer from single-point failure and heavy
communication burden. For an ADN with increasingly huge
number of inverters, centralized methods can no longer meet
the need for fast and reliable VVC. Therefore, distributed
VVC has gained great attention recently. Based on dis-
tributed optimization algorithms such as alternating direction
of multipliers [5], [6], and generalized Benders decomposi-
tion [7], effective distributed VVC is achieved using only local
and neighboring information.
Despite signiﬁcant research in distributed VVC, computa-
tion and communication burdens remain a bottleneck for these
methods in real practice. Optimization based distributed VVC
requires sufﬁcient computational power and frequent com-
munication between the inverters, which is unaffordable for
ADN operators. Hence, learning-based control solutions with
cloud-edge collaboration architecture have been proposed. A
representative example is centralized training & decentralized
execution (CTDE) multi-agent reinforcement learning (RL)
framework [8].
In the CTDE framework, the cloud platform carries out the
centralized training process, which shoulders the majority of
the computation burden. The edge controllers, on the other
hand, execute the trained policies with local measurements.
After centralized training, the only computation burden for
inverters in execution stage is the forward propagation of
the local policy networks, which is fast enough to real-
ize real-time VVC. Several multi-agent RL methods for
distributed VVC have been investigated under this frame-
work, such as multi-agent deep deterministic policy gradient
(MADDPG) [9], [10], [11], [12], multi-agent soft actor-critic
(MASAC) [13], [14], [15], and multi-agent twin delayed deep
deterministic policy gradient (MATD3) [16].
The above CTDE based multi-agent RL methods have
one thing in common: they all maintain a “central value
network” on the cloud platform to approximate the global
reward of the system, whose input concatenates observations
1949-3053 c⃝2024 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Texas at Arlington. Downloaded on June 27,2026 at 06:17:33 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

5762
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SMART GRID, VOL. 15, NO. 6, NOVEMBER 2024
and actions of all RL agents to optimize policies and
achieve coordination. But the curse of dimensionality and
training burden caused by the “central value network” limit
their performance on large-scale distribution systems. Unlike
the aforementioned approaches, value network factorization,
exempliﬁed by VDN [17] and QMIX [18] only maintains
a relatively small-scale mix network on the cloud platform,
reducing training difﬁculty and burden. These methods have
also been applied in distributed VVC recently [19]. However,
the critical mix network in existing works is relatively simple,
whose performance may not be assured as the number of edge
controllers increases. Therefore, a more effective mix network
structure is needed for large-scale multi-agent systems.
This paper is inspired by the success of attention mechanism
in the ﬁeld of natural language processing. Attention mecha-
nism aggregates scattered information based on the calculated
attention distribution, which has a strong ability to extract
the most important information for learning. Some pioneering
works also combine attention mechanism and RL to address
dispatch problems in power systems. For example, researchers
in [20], [21], [22] utilize attention mechanism to process
global information so that the most relevant information is
fed into the RL agents for better training. And researchers
in [23], [24] leverage graph attention networks to explicitly
embed the topology and features of distribution networks or
transportation networks so that RL agents can better perceive
the system states. As can be seen, most of the existing works
use attention mechanism to extract signiﬁcant information. But
attention mechanism is rarely used to achieve coordination
under the scheme of value network factorization, which is one
of the innovations of this paper.
On the other hand, since RL is data-driven, the performance
of multi-agent RL methods for distributed VVC relies heavily
on the observations’ accuracy. Due to the sensitivity of the
policy networks in RL agents, once there exists a small
perturbation in the observations, the generated control actions
can be very distorted. In reality, perturbations in observations,
such as measurement noises, communication errors, and even
cyber-attacks are unavoidable in the edge controllers. The
existing multi-agent RL methods for distributed VVC lack
consideration of these perturbations, which hinders their appli-
cation to real-world ADNs.
In this paper, we propose a Robust Attention-Enhanced Soft
Actor-Critic (RASAC) method for distributed VVC in ADNs.
As shown in Fig. 1, in the centralized training stage, local
policies, local value networks, along with a mix network are
trained on the cloud platform. The proposed mix network in
RASAC utilizes an agent-level attention mechanism to achieve
coordination, which can dynamically measure the importance
of each local agent to the whole system. After the centralized
training, local policy networks are downloaded to the edge
controllers (PV inverters in this paper) for decentralized
execution.
Moreover, considering possible observation perturbations in
the execution stage, a novel robust regularizer is designed
to enhance the agents’ robustness. Unlike traditional robust
reinforcement learning methods, the proposed robust regular-
izer only requires a small modiﬁcation of the policies’ loss
Fig. 1.
Overall structure of the proposed method under CTDE framework.
function without massive tuning and extra training. Details of
the mix network and the robust regularizer will be introduced
in Section III. The unique contributions of this paper are
summarized as follows.
1) In order to achieve distributed VVC in ADN, we model
each inverter in the ADN as an RL agent and formulate
the distributed VVC problem as a cooperative Markov game,
which can be efﬁciently optimized by CTDE based multi-
agent RL algorithms. Under CTDE framework, we utilize the
value network factorization method, in which only local value
networks and a mix network are maintained on the cloud
platform, successfully avoiding the curse of dimensionality
and training burden.
2) Based on the idea of value network factorization, a
novel mix network with agent-level attention mechanism is
proposed to achieve coordination between the RL agents.
Compared to existing value network factorization methods, our
proposed mechanism treats each agent as an attention input
and calculates their intercorrelation using global information
and local unique features, which dynamically captures the
importance of each agent to the whole system and achieves
outstanding performance.
3) Considering possible observation perturbations in exe-
cution stage, a robust regularizer is added to the policies’
loss function, which involves little additional computation
and automatically incorporates robustness into the policies.
This novel regularizer greatly enhances the agents’ ability
to compress possible observation perturbations and improves
the applicability of current RL methods to real-world ADNs.
Comprehensive experiments using real-world data demon-
strate the effectiveness and robustness of our proposed
method.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows.
Section II formulates the distributed VVC problem in ADNs,
and introduces the cooperative Markov game and value
network factorization method used in this paper. Section III
introduces the proposed attention-enhanced mix network and
robust regularizer in detail. Section IV demonstrates the
effectiveness and robustness of RASAC with different test
cases using real-world data. Finally, we present the conclusion
and directions for future research.
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Texas at Arlington. Downloaded on June 27,2026 at 06:17:33 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

YANG et al.: ATTENTION-ENHANCED MULTI-AGENT RL AGAINST OBSERVATION PERTURBATIONS
5763
II. PRELIMINARIES
In this section, we ﬁrst formulate the distributed VVC
problem in ADNs. Then, the settings of the cooperative
Markov game in this paper are explained. Lastly, we intro-
duce the value network factorization method as an important
preliminary of our proposed attention-enhanced mix network.
A. Distributed VVC Problem Formulation
In this paper, we consider an ADN implemented with N PV
inverters at node N1, . . . , NN, which can be described as an
undirected graph G(V, E), where V and E are the collections
of nodes and branches in the ADN. Objective of the VVC
problem is to minimize voltage deviation and network loss by
adjusting reactive power generation of the PV inverters. Power
ﬂow functions of this ADN are shown in eq. (1)–(2), where
PPV
i
and QPV
i
are the active and reactive power generated by
PV inverter at node i, PL
i and QL
i are the active and reactive
load at node i, Gij and Bij are the real and imaginary part
of the corresponding element in the admittance matrix of the
network, θij is the voltage phase difference between node i
and j. If i /∈{N1, . . . , NN}, then PPV
i
= QPV
i
= 0.
PPV
i
−PL
i = Vi

j∈V
Vj

Gij cos θij + Bij sin θij

, ∀i ∈V (1)
QPV
i
−QL
i = Vi

j∈V
Vj

−Bij cos θij + Gij sin θij

, ∀i ∈V (2)
In the distributed VVC problem, the ADN can be divided
into M control regions R1, . . . , RM and we model each PV
inverter as an agent I1, . . . , IN. Local observations of the nth
agent In is {PPV
i
, PL
i , QPV
i
, QL
i , Vi, ∀i ∈Rm}, Rm is the region
where In belongs to, i.e., Nn ∈Rm. Local control action of In
is QPV
Nn, which satisﬁes the rated capacity constraint |QPV
Nn| ≤

(SPV
Nn)2 −(PPV
Nn)2 where SPV
Nn is the rated capacity of the nth
inverter.
B. Cooperative Markov Game
In order to apply multi-agent RL algorithms to the dis-
tributed VVC problem, we consider an extension of Markov
decision process [25] called cooperative Markov game [26].
The cooperative Markov game describes the interaction
between N agents I1, . . . , IN and a common environment,
which can be deﬁned by a tuple (S, [On]N, [An]N, p, r, γ ). S
is the state space of the common environment, On and An are
the local observation space and local action space of In.
At timestep t, state of the environment is st ∈S. Each agent
observes the environment and receives its local observation
on,t ∈On, then chooses a local action an,t ∈An based on its
stochastic policy πn which is a probability density function
πn:On × An →[0, ∞). After all of the actions are executed,
the environment transfers to next state st+1 ∈S based on the
transition probability p:S × A1 × . . . × AN × S →[0, ∞).
After this transition, each agent receives the next observation
on,t+1 ∈On and a global reward rt which measures the
cooperative performance of this transition. The goal of each
agent is to maximize the expected discounted return:
max
π1,...,πNJ(π1, . . . , πN) = Eτ∼π1,...,πN
 T

t=0
γ trt

(3)
where τ is the trajectory when applying π1, . . . , πN to the
common environment, T is the length of an episode, γ ∈[0, 1]
is the discount factor for future rewards.
In value-based RL algorithms such as soft actor-critic [27]
used in this paper, we usually utilize two neural networks to
approximate the policy and expected discounted return. The
policy network πθn approximates In’s policy with parameters
θn, which consists of subnetworks μθn and σθn. The output
of μθn and σθn are mean value and standard deviation of the
action distribution such that
an,t = tanh

μθn

on,t

+ σθn

on,t

⊙ξn

(4)
where ξn satisﬁes standard normal distribution.
The value network Qφn approximates In’s expected dis-
counted return with parameters φn. A local value network
whose input is local observation and local action is deﬁned
as:
Qφn(on, an) =
E
 T

t=0
γ trt −α log πθn

·|on,t

|on,0 = on, an,0 = an

(5)
where −log πθn(·|on,t) is a term measuring the randomness of
the policy, α is its corresponding coefﬁcient. Since the local
value network only utilizes local information, which makes it
hard to achieve coordination between agents, several methods
propose “central value networks”. The input of “central value
networks” concatenates observations and actions of all agents
such that the gradients for local policy networks are calculated
based on global information.
C. Value Network Factorization
For large-scale systems, “central value networks” suf-
fer from the curse of dimensionality and training burden.
Therefore, value network factorization methods such as VDN
and QMIX are gaining much more attention. In value network
factorization methods, a mix network fϕ with parameters ϕ is
trained along with the local policy networks and local value
networks, whose role is to aggregate the outputs of all local
value networks into a global one. With the help of the mix
network, the expected discounted return is approximated using
the aggregated global information, which makes it easier to
implement coordination between RL agents.
As shown in Fig. 2, local value network Qφn takes local
observation on and local action an as input to generate
the local value Qφn(on, an). Then, in order to achieve
coordination, the mix network aggregates all of the local
values Qφ1(o1, a1), . . . , QφN(oN, aN) into one global value
fϕ(Qφ1(o1, a1), . . . , QφN(oN, aN)) to approximate the total
expected discounted return. It should be noted that after the
value network factorization, fϕ(Qφ1(o1, a1), . . . , QφN(oN, aN))
represents the expected discounted return while the local
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Texas at Arlington. Downloaded on June 27,2026 at 06:17:33 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

5764
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SMART GRID, VOL. 15, NO. 6, NOVEMBER 2024
Fig. 2.
Value network factorization method.
values Qφ1(o1, a1), . . . , QφN(oN, aN) have no corresponding
physical meanings anymore.
During training, parameters ϕ of the mix network and
parameters φ1, . . . , φN of local value networks are optimized
by minimizing the following loss function L(ϕ, φ1, . . . , φN):
L(ϕ, φ1, . . . , φN) =
1
|D|

D

fϕ

Qφ1

o1,t, a1,t

, . . . , QφN

oN,t, aN,t

−y
2	
(6)
where D is a batch of data randomly sampled from the replay
buffer which stores the transition information. y is the target
value for fϕ deﬁned as:
y = rt +
γ

fϕ′

Qφ′
1

o1,t+1, a1,t+1

, . . . , Qφ′
N

oN,t+1, aN,t+1

−
α
N

n=1
log πθn

an,t+1|on,t+1


(7)
where
an,t+1
∼
πθn(on,t+1).
After
the
calculation
of
L(ϕ, φ1, . . . , φN), the parameters are updated using gradient
descent:
ϕ ←ϕ −λϕ∇ϕL(ϕ, φ1, . . . , φN)
(8)
φn ←φn −λφn∇φnL(ϕ, φ1, . . . , φN), n = 1, . . . , N
(9)
In eq. (7), fϕ′ and Qφ′
1, . . . , Qφ′
N are the target networks
for fϕ and Qφ1, . . . , QφN, introduced to stabilize the training
process, whose parameters ϕ′ and φ′
1, . . . , φ′
N are delayed
parameters of ϕ and φ1, . . . , φN. These parameters are gradu-
ally updated using:
ϕ′ ←λϕ′ϕ +

1 −λϕ′
ϕ′
(10)
φ′
n ←λφ′nφn +

1 −λφ′n

φ′
n, n = 1, . . . , N
(11)
With the help of the mix network and local value networks,
parameters θ1, . . . , θN of local policy networks can be opti-
mized by minimizing the loss function L(θ1, . . . , θN):
L(θ1, . . . , θN) =
1
|D|

D

−fϕ

Qφ1

o1,t, a1,t

, . . . , QφN

oN,t, aN,t

+
α
N

n=1
log πθn

an,t|on,t


(12)
where an,t ∼πθn(on,t), then parameters θ1, . . . , θN are also
updated using gradient descent:
θn ←θn −λθn∇θnL(θ1, . . . , θN), n = 1, . . . , N
(13)
In the functions above, λϕ′, λφ′
1, . . . , λφ′
N, are updating rate
of corresponding parameters, λϕ, λφ1, . . . , λφN, λθ1, . . . , λθN
are learning rate of corresponding parameters.
Although value network factorization methods alleviate the
training burden and reduce the critic network size, existing
mix networks are relatively simple, whose performance is
not assured as the number of agents increases. Take two
popular value network factorization methods, VDN and QMIX
as examples: VDN factorizes the global value fϕ into sum
of local values: fϕ = N
n=1 Qφn(on, an); and QMIX extends
this addictive function into a modiﬁed weighted sum, whose
weights are directly calculated by the global state without
considering unique features of each agent. The expressive
ability of the mix network in VDN and QMIX is limited
due to their formulation. In federated multi-agent soft actor-
critic (FMASAC) proposed in our previous work [19], the
mix network is a multi-layer perception (MLP), whose input
is local values and output is the approximated global reward.
Although an MLP has a much stronger approximation ability,
the coordination is not explicitly incorporated into its structure,
which means the agents’ intercorrelation captured by the MLP
is relatively random and lacks interpretability, making it less
scalable and reliable in larger systems.
As can be seen from the above analysis, when the number of
agents increases, it becomes increasingly challenging for these
methods to achieve coordination due to their mix network
formulation. Therefore, a novel mix network, which explicitly
incorporates agents’ coordination into its structure, is urgently
needed.
III. METHODS
In this section, RASAC, an attention-enhanced multi-agent
RL method against observation perturbations is proposed,
which achieves not only effective coordination but also robust
performance. We ﬁrst formulate the distributed VVC problem
as a cooperative Markov game, and describe the deﬁni-
tions in detail. Then the mix network with an agent-level
attention mechanism and the proposed robust regularizer are
introduced.
A. Distributed VVC as A Cooperative Markov Game
First, we formulate the distributed VVC problem as a
cooperative Markov game which can be optimized by multi-
agent RL algorithms under CTDE framework. The deﬁnitions
of state space, observation space, action space and global
reward are designed as follows.
1) State Space: The state s ∈S of the cooperative Markov
game is deﬁned as a vector: s = (PPV
i
, PL
i , QPV
i
, QL
i , Vi), i ∈V,
which includes PV generation information, load information,
and voltage information of the ADN.
2) Observation Space: In the cooperative Markov game,
observation of agent In on ∈On is based on the local
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Texas at Arlington. Downloaded on June 27,2026 at 06:17:33 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

YANG et al.: ATTENTION-ENHANCED MULTI-AGENT RL AGAINST OBSERVATION PERTURBATIONS
5765
measurements of its region: on = (PPV
i
, PL
i , QPV
i
, QL
i , Vi), i ∈
Rm, Rm is the region where In belongs to.
3) Action Space: In the cooperative Markov game, action
of agent In an ∈An controls the reactive power generation
of its corresponding PV inverter. an ∈[−1, 1], and QPV
Nn is
calculated as QPV
Nn = an

(SPV
Nn)2 −(PPV
Nn)2 to satisfy the rated
capacity constraint.
4) Reward: Global reward of the cooperative Markov game
aligns with the objective of distributed VVC problem. In order
to minimize voltage deviation and network loss, the global
reward is deﬁned as:
r = −βV

i∈V
Vi −Vref

|V|
−βp

ij∈E PLOSS
ij
|E|
(14)
where Vref is the reference voltage magnitude, PLOSS
ij
is the
network loss on branch ij, βV and βp are coefﬁcients for
voltage reward and network loss reward. Since the focus of
this paper is voltage safety and the voltage proﬁles facing
perturbations, we set βV = 1.0, βp = 0.1 here to help the RL
agents focus on the voltage deviation term.
B. Attention-Enhanced Mix Network
As we mentioned before, as the number of RL agents
increases, current value network factorization methods are
difﬁcult to achieve effective coordination. A more efﬁcient
mix network is indispensable. Attention mechanism, which
aggregates scattered information based on the calculated atten-
tion distribution, has a strong ability to extract information
for learning, thus gaining great success in the ﬁeld of natural
language processing. There are three vectors in attention mech-
anism: query vector, key vector, and value vector. Importance
of each value vector is calculated based on the correlation
between the query vector and key vector so that important
information can be given higher weights. Inspired by its
great success, we incorporate attention mechanism into value
network factorization: Intuitively, we model each RL agent in
distributed VVC as an attention input, whose importance to
the whole system can be dynamically measured by attention
mechanism, so that effective coordination and aggregation
can be realized. Based on this idea, we improve existing
value network factorization methods with an agent-level atten-
tion mechanism [28] and propose an attention-enhanced mix
network. For simplicity, in the following contents, we still
denote all parameters in the proposed mix network as ϕ and
output of the network as fϕ.
We ﬁrst clarify the three vectors used in our attention-
enhanced mix network. As shown in Fig. 3, since the mix
network aggregates local values Qφ1(o1, a1), . . . , QφN(oN, aN)
into the global value fϕ, value vector for agent In is its
own local value Qφn(on, an). The correlation between the
query vector and the key vector determines the weight of
corresponding value vector. Therefore, the query vector in the
mix network is the embedded global state, and the key vector is
the embedded agents’ local features so that global information
and local unique information can be fully analyzed.
Then we introduce the details of the mix network. In
addition to agent-level attention mechanism, we also utilize
multi-head attention [29] to obtain more information, and the
number of attention heads in the network is H. In the hth head,
the global state s is embedded by an MLP Wh
q to formulate
the query vector Wh
q(s). While the local features of agent
In, including local observation on and agent id n (one-hot
encoding) is embedded by another MLP Wh
k to formulate the
key vector Wh
k (on, n). It should be noted that the parameters
of Wh
q and Wh
k are shared among all of the agents, which
creates common embedding spaces for more efﬁcient learning.
Afterwards, the importance χh
n for agent In in the hth head is
calculated based on the correlation between the query vector
and the key vector:
χh
n ∝exp

Wh
q(s)Wh
k (on, n)T
(15)
Here, we pass the correlation between the query vector and
key vector into a softmax function:
χh
n = softmax

Wh
q(s)Wh
k (on, n)T
√dk

(16)
where dk is the scaling factor equal to the dimension of the
query vector and key vector. After the calculation of χh
n for
each agent, we can determine the output of the hth head Qh
as weighted sum of the value vectors:
Qh =
N

n=1

χh
n Qφn(on, an)
	
(17)
Till now, based on the calculated importance we success-
fully aggregate local values Qφ1(o1, a1), . . . , QφN(oN, aN) into
the outputs of several attention heads Q1, . . . , QH. Then, as
in QMIX, to further aggregate Q1, . . . , QH into the global
value fϕ, after activated by an Exponential Linear Unit (ELU)
function, Q1, . . . , QH are summed using the positive weights
wh(s) and bias b(s), which are calculated by two MLPs based
on the global state s. The ﬁnal output of the mix network is:
fϕ =
H

h=1

wh(s)ELU

Qh	
+ b(s)
(18)
which is used to approximate the expected discounted return
of the formulated cooperative Markov game.
Compared to existing value factorization methods, the
proposed mix network explicitly incorporates agents’ coordi-
nation into its structure, which can dynamically capture the
importance of each agent to the whole system, thus avoiding
inefﬁcient training and unnecessary exploration of the mix
network. Effectiveness of the proposed mix network will be
demonstrated in Section IV.
C. Robust Regularizer
Although CTDE based multi-agent RL algorithms achieve
good convergence and performance on VVC problems, few
of them consider the inﬂuence of possible observation pertur-
bations. Since the policy network of RL agents is sensitive
to the input, possible observation perturbations may cause
distorted actions and lead to a serious deterioration in exe-
cution stage. As shown in Fig. 1, during the interaction with
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Texas at Arlington. Downloaded on June 27,2026 at 06:17:33 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

5766
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SMART GRID, VOL. 15, NO. 6, NOVEMBER 2024
Fig. 3.
Framework of the proposed attention-enhanced mix network.
the real-world ADN, accurate observation of agent In is on,
while the observation received by the agent might be on ∈
B(on, ϵ) because of perturbations such as measurement noises,
communication errors, and even cyber-attacks. Here, B(on, ϵ)
is the neighborhood of on bounded by ∥on −on∥∞≤ϵ. This
difference in observation could cause a signiﬁcant divergence
in the generated action, i.e., πθn(on) turns into πθn(on).
In order to tackle the above problem, we consider robust
reinforcement learning [30] whose objective is to maintain the
performance of RL agents under adversarial perturbations. In
order to improve the RL agents’ robustness, traditional robust
reinforcement learning methods usually concurrently train an
adversarial agent. During training, the adversarial agent attacks
the observation of RL agents to make their performance
deteriorate. Then the RL agents’ robustness is gained through
the adversarial training process. However, this adversarial
training requires massive computation and exhaustive tuning,
and may result in an unstable training performance [31].
Instead of burdensome adversarial training, recent studies
show that minimizing the distance between πθn(on) and
πθn(on) during training is enough to improve the robustness of
the policy network [32], [33]. Based on this idea, we propose
a novel robust regularizer to be added into the loss function
of the policy networks, so that policy networks can minimize
the distance between πθn(on) and πθn(on) while maximizing
the reward.
In this paper, since the agents’ policies are stochastic, we
utilize KL divergence to measure the distance between the
normal action distribution πθn(on) and the perturbated action
distribution πθn(on). Our proposed robust regularizer is deﬁned
as the maximum distance found in B(on, ϵ):
Rθn(on, ϵ) =
max
˜o∈B(on,ϵ)
DKL

πθn(on)||πθn(on)

=
max
˜oϵB(on,ϵ)
log σθn(on)
σθn(on) +
σ 2
θn(on) +

μθn(on) −μθn(on)
2
2σ 2
θn(˜on)
−1
2 (19)
With
this
regularizer
Rθn(on, ϵ),
the
loss
function
L(θ1, . . . , θN) in eq. (12) is further transformed into:
L(θ1, . . . , θN) =
1
|D|

D

−fϕ

Qφ1

o1,t, a1,t

, . . . , QφN

oN,t, aN,t

+
α
N

n=1
log πθn

an,t|on,t

+ δ
N

n=1
Rθn

on,t, ϵ


(20)
where δ is the coefﬁcient for the regularizer. As can be
seen from the deﬁnition and the transformed loss function,
the essence of this added regularizer is to construct a game
between the RL agent and observation perturbations. Then
RL agents’ robustness can be enhanced through this game.
Compared to traditional adversarial training, the only task left
to do is appropriately adjusting the parameters ϵ and δ in
eq. (20), and the robustness can be automatically incorporated
into agents’ policies. The overall training process of RASAC
is presented in Algorithm 1.
It should be noted that all of the ϵ
in this paper
are rescaled by the standard deviation of each element
in the agents’ observation. Furthermore, since calculating
the robust regularizer Rθn(on, ϵ) in eq. (19) involves the
policy network πθn, it is a high dimensional non-convex
optimization problem, which is hard to solve a global optimal
on for max˜oϵB(on,ϵ)DKL(πθn(on)||πθn(on)). Therefore, we use
Stochastic gradient Langevin dynamics (SGLD) [34] to ﬁnd
a suitable on in B(on, ϵ), based on which we calculate
DKL(πθn(on)||πθn(on)) to approximate Rθn(on, ϵ). SGLD is
a common optimization algorithm used in machine learning
to solve high dimensional optimization problems. In each
iteration of SGLD, the gradients of model parameters are
calculated using one sample or a small sample of data
so that computation time and memory can be reduced.
Another important feature of SGLD is that it adds Gaussian
noises during iteration to encourage exploration. In this
paper, to calculate Rθn(on, ϵ) we ﬁrst initialize a on near
on using random noise. Then, based on this on, we calcu-
late DKL(πθn(on)||πθn(on)) and use backpropagation of the
policy network πθn to calculate its gradient regarding on,
i.e.,
∇onDKL||(πθn(on)πθn(on)). Since the objective for on
is to maximize DKL(πθn(on)||πθn(on)), on in next iteration
is calculated with gradient ascent. Finally, the new on is
bounded into B(on, ϵ). After iterations, a suitable on can be
calculated quickly and effectively. The process of SGLD is
also presented in Algorithm 2, where η is the noise factor, K is
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Texas at Arlington. Downloaded on June 27,2026 at 06:17:33 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

YANG et al.: ATTENTION-ENHANCED MULTI-AGENT RL AGAINST OBSERVATION PERTURBATIONS
5767
Algorithm 1 RASAC
Input: Initial parameters for all networks, initial replay buffer,
ADN environment
Output:
Local
policies
πθ1, . . . , πθN
for
decentralized
execution
1: foreach episode do
2: foreach environment step t do
3: foreach agent n do in parallel
4: Locally observe on,t;
5: Locally execute an,t ∼πθn(on,t);
6: end
7: Calculate global reward rt as in eq. (14);
8: Store transition information into replay buffer;
9: if t mod update frequency = 0 then
10: Sample a batch D from replay buffer;
11: Compute loss L(ϕ, φ1, . . . , φN) as in eq. (6);
12: Compute loss L(θ1, . . . , θN) as in eq. (20);
13: Update ϕ as in eq. (8);
14: Update φ1, . . . , φN as in eq. (9);
15: Update θ1, . . . , θN as in eq. (13);
16: Update ϕ′ as in eq. (10);
17: Update φ′
1, . . . , φ′
N as in eq. (11);
18: end
19: end
20: end
21: return πθ1, . . . , πθN
Algorithm 2 SGLD
Input: Local observation on, local policy πθn, ϵ, noise factor
η, iteration steps K
Output: Approximated Rθn(on, ϵ)
1: Calculate upper bound on = on + ϵ;
2: Calculate lower bound on = on −ϵ;
3: Calculate step size ϵK = ϵ/K;
4: Initialize on = on + sgn(η√2ϵK ⊙ξn) · ϵK;
5: for k = 2 to K do
6: on = on + sgn(∇onDKL(πθn(on)||πθn(on)) + η√2ϵK/k ⊙
ξn) · ϵK;
7: on = min(on, on);
8: on = max(on, on);
9: end
10: Calculate Rθn(on, ϵ) = DKL(πθn(on)||πθn(on));
11: return Rθn(on, ϵ)
the iteration steps, and sgn(·) is the sign function. To speed up
this calculation, we limit the iteration to K steps and discretize
the step size as ϵ/K. The following test results demonstrate
that Rθn(on, ϵ) calculated by this simple SGLD is enough to
empower the agents’ robustness.
IV. NUMERICAL STUDY
In this section, to validate the effectiveness and robustness
of the proposed RASAC, several numerical simulations are
conducted on IEEE 33-bus [35] and 141-bus [36] distribution
networks. The load and PV proﬁles used here are based on
Fig. 4.
PV installations and local regions of 33-bus test system.
3-year Portuguese electricity load data and PV generation data
collected from Elia group [37]. In the following training and
execution, we sample load and PV proﬁles from the 3-year
dataset and import them into corresponding simulation system
to evaluate the state of the ADN. In 33-bus case, the system
is partitioned into 4 regions, 6 PVs are added on bus 13, 18,
22, 25, 29, and 33. In 141-bus case, the system is partitioned
into 9 regions, 22 PVs are added on bus 36, 53, 59, 62, 68,
69, 75, 77, 82, 87, 100, 106, 110, 111, 116, 117, 130, 133,
137, 138, 139, and 141. Installation details are presented in
the following ﬁgures and table. According to the requirements
of real-time VVC and resolution of the used dataset, we set
the control period to 3 minutes, which is also the interval
between two timesteps in an episode. In addition, considering
the training time and usual practice of reinforcement learning,
each episode during training lasts for 240 timesteps, which
corresponds to the proﬁle of half a day. Voltage limitations
are [0.95, 1.05]p.u., and Vref = 1.0p.u..
We ﬁrst introduce the settings of the proposed and baseline
algorithms, then the training and execution performance on
VVC are presented and compared in ﬁgures and tables
respectively. Finally, to test the robustness, we add noises and
attacks in the observation of RL agents, which are common
in real-world ADNs, and show their performance under such
perturbations.
All of the RL agents are implemented in Python with the
deep learning framework Pytorch. Experiments are run on
a computer with a 2.3GHz Intel Core i7-10875H CPU and
16GB RAM. Considering the stochasticity of RL algorithms,
for each group of experiments, we test with 3 independent
random seeds. Then the mean values and error bounds of the
algorithms are presented as solid lines and shading areas in
the ﬁgures.
A. Proposed and Baseline Algorithms Setup
Our proposed method, RASAC, is implemented with an
agent-level attention mechanism and trained with the robust
regularizer. To verify the effectiveness of the proposed
attention mechanism, we choose two famous value network
factorization methods, QMIX and VDN as benchmarks. And
combine QMIX and VDN with the soft actor-critic RL
algorithm used in this paper to formulate QMIXSAC and
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Texas at Arlington. Downloaded on June 27,2026 at 06:17:33 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

5768
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SMART GRID, VOL. 15, NO. 6, NOVEMBER 2024
Fig. 5.
PV installations and local regions of 141-bus test system.
TABLE I
SETTINGS OF THE TEST SYSTEM
VDNSAC. FMASAC in our previous work is also imple-
mented for comparison, which is demonstrated effective when
the number of agents is small. As we introduced before, the
mix network of FMASAC is a simple MLP to aggregate local
values into a global one. In addition, to verify the robustness
of RASAC, we formulate an attention-enhanced soft actor-
critic (ASAC) for the ablation study. All settings for ASAC
are identical to those of RASAC, except that there is no
robust regularizer in the loss function of policy networks.
Hyperparameters of these RL agents are listed in Table II.
To compare the performance between CTDE based multi-
agent RL methods and single-agent RL method, we also
construct centralized soft actor-critic (CSAC) as a centralized
VVC baseline. There is only one agent in CSAC that utilizes
global measurements to determine control actions for all
inverters inside the ADN.
B. Training and Execution Performance
In the centralized training stage, we randomly select 100
episodes of data for interaction. Test is conducted after each
episode with 5 episodes of data randomly selected for RL
TABLE II
HYPERPARAMETERS OF RL AGENTS
Fig. 6.
33-bus system centralized training results of RASAC and baseline
algorithms.
agents’ evaluation. Average of the 5 test episodes’ total
rewards is calculated to represent the agents’ centralized train-
ing performance, which is displayed in the following ﬁgures
(blue for RASAC, orange for CSAC, yellow for VDNSAC,
brown for QMIXSAC, and green for FMASAC). In the
following ﬁgures, solid lines and shading areas represent mean
values and error bounds across 3 random seeds, respectively.
Fig. 6 displays the performance of each algorithm in 33-bus
system, which contains only 6 agents. For CTDE based multi-
agent RL methods in this system, RASAC and QMIXSAC
converge steadily while FMASAC and VDNSAC diverge in
some cases. As we mentioned before, VDNSAC factorizes
global value into a simple sum of local values, which may
not represent the agents’ relationship in this system. And
FMASAC utilizes an MLP to capture the agents’ intercorrela-
tion, which is relatively random and not scalable, so FMASAC
may diverge sometimes. As for the ﬁnal performance, our
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Texas at Arlington. Downloaded on June 27,2026 at 06:17:33 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

YANG et al.: ATTENTION-ENHANCED MULTI-AGENT RL AGAINST OBSERVATION PERTURBATIONS
5769
Fig. 7.
141-bus system centralized training results of RASAC and baseline
algorithms.
Fig. 8.
Voltage proﬁles on bus 18 in 33-bus system during a typical summer
day.
proposed RASAC achieves the highest ﬁnal reward, which
demonstrates effectiveness of the proposed agent-level atten-
tion mechanism.
In the larger 141-bus system, since the 22 agents can only
observe a small portion of the system, it becomes much
harder to achieve efﬁcient coordination. As shown in Fig. 7,
VDNSAC fails to coordinate the agents and its training is
very unstable. Although QMIXSAC does not diverge violently
as VDNSAC, its reward does not grow during the training
process. And the performance of FMASAC also declines
signiﬁcantly. In contrast, with help of the proposed agent-level
attention mechanism, RASAC maintains steady convergence
and outstanding performance as the system expands.
After the centralized training, we download the ﬁnal policies
to edge controllers for decentralized execution, which is called
the execution stage. First, to demonstrate the necessity of VVC
and the effectiveness of RL methods, we choose a summer
day for 33-bus system and a winter day for 141-bus system in
the 3-year dataset, respectively. In these two typical days, we
compare the converged RASAC, ASAC, and CSAC algorithms
with a “No Control” method, where no PVs are involved in
VVC operation, i.e., all PV’s reactive power generation is
always zero. For better visualization, we present the voltage
proﬁles of PV bus 18 in 33-bus system and PV bus 68 in
141-bus system as follows.
As can be seen from Fig. 8, when no PVs are involved in
VVC operation, the voltage magnitude of the PV bus rises
rapidly in summer and exceeds the safety limitation due to
the high PV generation at noon. While in Fig. 9, since the PV
Fig. 9.
Voltage proﬁles on bus 68 in 141-bus system during a typical winter
day.
TABLE III
DISTRIBUTED VVC PERFORMANCE OF RASAC
AND BASELINE ALGORITHMS
generation cannot fully satisfy the electricity load, most of the
voltage magnitudes of No Control method deviate from the
reference value and are below the safety limitation. The above
observations indicate the necessity of VVC to prevent several
voltage issues caused by the integrated PVs. However, the RL
methods RASAC, ASAC, and CSAC perform much better than
the No Control method, whose proﬁles are much more steady
when facing different PV generations, which demonstrates the
effectiveness of data-driven RL methods on the VVC problem.
Next, to compare the performance of different RL methods,
we select a typical day for each month in the 3-year dataset,
i.e., 36 days (17280 timesteps in total) to test the RL agents’
VVC performance. The following table shows the voltage
deviations and network losses in these 17820 timesteps, in
which the best performance among the algorithms is marked
as bold.
As can be seen from the results listed in Table III, after
centralized training, our proposed RASAC realize lower volt-
age deviations in the execution stage, which means that CTDE
based multi-agent RL methods can be utilized to achieve
distributed VVC with appropriate algorithm and coordination
mechanism. Another important observation from Table III is
that RASAC and ASAC have almost the same performance on
distributed VVC problems without observation perturbances,
which means the added robust regularizer won’t sacriﬁce the
agents’ normal performance. However, the regularizer can
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Texas at Arlington. Downloaded on June 27,2026 at 06:17:33 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

5770
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SMART GRID, VOL. 15, NO. 6, NOVEMBER 2024
TABLE IV
33-BUS SYSTEM TOTAL REWARDS UNDER NOISES
greatly enhance the robustness against observation perturba-
tions, which will be presented in next subsection. As for the
network losses presented in Table III, since we encourage
the RL agents to focus on the voltage deviation term in the
reward function, there is no obvious difference in RL agents’
performance on network losses. However, it should be noted
that if the ADN operator is more concerned with the network
losses, the coefﬁcients in the reward function can be adjusted
accordingly and adaptively.
The most signiﬁcant distinction between the above CTDE
based multi-agent RL methods and CSAC lies in the action
dimension and the access to global information during
execution. Generally speaking, since CSAC utilizes global
information to determine global control actions during exe-
cution, it usually outperforms CTDE based multi-agent RL
methods which only have access to partial observation of the
system. However, CSAC may suffer from curse of dimen-
sionality during training, and the single-point failure and
communication burden limit its further application in real-
world ADNs. As can be seen from the training curves, CSAC
and our proposed RASAC have similar performance, which
demonstrates the effectiveness of the CTDE framework and
our proposed agent-level attention mechanism. After central-
ized training with an appropriate coordination method, the
proposed RASAC can achieve similar performance to CSAC
during execution with only local measurements. Test results
listed in Table III are consistent with the above observation.
C. Robustness Comparison
Different from the simulation environment, in the real-
world ADN, observation perturbations such as measurement
noises, communication errors, and even cyber-attacks are
unavoidable, thus requiring RL agents’ robustness. In this
subsection, we pick one trained policy of RASAC and ASAC
from the 3 random seeds, and compare their performance when
encountering noises and attacks in 33-bus system and 141-bus
system respectively.
For 33-bus system, to test RL agents’ robustness against
noises in observations, we add random noises from [−ϵ′, ϵ′] to
the observation of the RL agents. ϵ′ increases from 0.0 to 2.5,
and we conduct 30 episodes of test for each ϵ′. The following
table shows the mean values and standard deviations of total
rewards in these 30 episodes.
From the listed result, RASAC and ASAC have similar total
rewards with no perturbations (ϵ′ = 0.0). But as the noises
increase, the performance of ASAC greatly deteriorates, when
ϵ′ = 2.5, the total rewards of ASAC decrease by almost
Fig. 10.
Control actions and voltage proﬁles of RASAC and ASAC before
and after the ﬁrst type observation attack.
75%. While RASAC can keep good performance with similar
rewards when the measurement noises increase.
Then for 141-bus system, we test the agents’ robustness
against possible cyber-attacks. In this extreme scenario, we
assume the agents’ policy networks are leaked to a cyber
attacker who tries to manually manipulate the agents’ observa-
tions so that the control actions can be distorted. The reactive
power generated by PV inverters will be affected by distorted
control actions and may result in voltage violations in the
ADN. Our proposed robust regularizer can avoid the action
distortion to some extent, thus protecting safe operation of the
ADN under cyber-attacks.
In this experiment, the cyber attacker adds attacks from
[ −ϵ′, ϵ′] to the observation of the RL agents. Different from
random noises added in 33-bus case, the added attacks are
deliberately set by the attacker (for example, using SGLD
introduced in Section III to ﬁnd an appropriate attack) to
distort the control actions as much as possible. Therefore, we
select two typical timesteps and try two types of cyber-attacks:
in the ﬁrst type, ϵ′ = 1.5 and the attacker tries to maximize
the control actions to cause overvoltage; while in the second
type, ϵ′ = 1.0 and the attacker tries to minimize the control
actions to cause lower voltage. The control actions and voltage
proﬁles before the attack (RASAC, ASAC) and after the attack
(RASAC_attack, ASAC_attack) are depicted in the following
ﬁgures.
As can be seen from the ﬁgures, RASAC and ASAC have
similar control actions and voltage proﬁles before the attacks.
All of the voltages are near the reference value and within
a safe range, indicating the effectiveness of our proposed
attention mechanism again. However, RASAC and ASAC
behave very differently when facing the cyber-attacks. In
Fig. 10, since the attacker tries to cause overvoltage, control
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Texas at Arlington. Downloaded on June 27,2026 at 06:17:33 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

YANG et al.: ATTENTION-ENHANCED MULTI-AGENT RL AGAINST OBSERVATION PERTURBATIONS
5771
Fig. 11.
Control actions and voltage proﬁles of RASAC and ASAC before
and after the second type observation attack.
TABLE V
ONLINE COMPUTATIONAL TIME OF RASAC
actions of ASAC are greatly increased due to this attack. This
results in an increase of the reactive power generated by PV
inverters and the voltage proﬁle is also raised. And in Fig. 11,
since the attacker tries to cause lower voltage, control actions
of ASAC are greatly decreased due to this attack. This also
results in a decrease of the reactive power generated by PV
inverters and the voltage proﬁle also drops. In Fig. 11, the
lowest voltage magnitude of ASAC after attack is about 0.85
p.u., which may cause power quality degradation, equipment
damage, and even PV off-grid in real-world ADNs.
The only difference between RASAC and ASAC is the
added robust regularizer, but this small modiﬁcation can make
a remarkable difference in robustness performance. Under such
severe attacks, the control actions of RASAC are much less
distorted than ASAC. Because of the enhanced robustness, the
voltage proﬁles of RASAC are not signiﬁcantly affected either,
and most of the voltage magnitudes in RASAC are still kept in
the safe range. It can be seen from the above results, with only
an added robust regularizer in the policies’ loss functions, the
applicability of current RL methods can be greatly enhanced.
The computational time is also an important indicator of
applicability and scalability for CTDE based multi-agent RL
methods. Therefore, we test the RASAC average computa-
tional time for one agent of one step, which is listed in the
following table.
During online execution, the only computation burden
for inverters is the forward propagation of the local policy
networks, which only takes milliseconds. Since the VVC in
ADNs is usually minute-level (for example, 3 minutes), this
computational time is completely sufﬁcient for real practice
of our proposed method.
V. CONCLUSION
With the number of edge agents increasing, there are
two serious concerns when applying CTDE based multi-
agent RL algorithms to real-world ADNs, i.e., “coordination
between value networks” and “robustness of policy networks”.
Therefore, a mix network with an agent-level attention mech-
anism is proposed in this paper, which can dynamically
measure the importance of each local agent to the whole
system, achieving excellent coordination. An effective robust
regularizer is also designed to enhance the agents’ robustness
against observation perturbations, which only requires a small
modiﬁcation of the policies’ loss function. Numerical studies
have validated our proposed method.
In future work, new RL method to detect cyber-attack is an
interesting research topic.
REFERENCES
[1] K. E. Antoniadou-Plytaria, I. N. Kouveliotis-Lysikatos, P. S. Georgilakis,
and N. D. Hatziargyriou, “Distributed and decentralized voltage control
of smart distribution networks: Models, methods, and future research,”
IEEE Trans. Smart Grid, vol. 8, no. 6, pp. 2999–3008, Nov. 2017.
[2] H. T. Nguyen and D.-H. Choi, “Three-stage inverter-based peak shaving
and volt-VAR control in active distribution networks using online safe
deep reinforcement learning,” IEEE Trans. Smart Grid, vol. 13, no. 4,
pp. 3266–3277, Jul. 2022.
[3] P. Li et al., “Coordinated control method of voltage and reactive power
for active distribution networks based on soft open point,” IEEE Trans.
Sustain. Energy, vol. 8, no. 4, pp. 1430–1442, Oct. 2017.
[4] M. B. Liu, C. A. Canizares, and W. Huang, “Reactive power and voltage
control in distribution systems with limited switching operations,” IEEE
Trans. Power Syst., vol. 24, no. 2, pp. 889–899, May 2009
[5] T. Xu and W. Wu, “Accelerated ADMM-based fully distributed inverter-
based volt/VAR control strategy for active distribution networks,” IEEE
Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 16, no. 12, pp. 7532–7543, Dec. 2020.
[6] H. J. Liu, W. Shi, and H. Zhu, “Distributed voltage control in distribution
networks: Online and robust implementations,” IEEE Trans. Smart Grid,
vol. 9, no. 6, pp. 6106–6117, Nov. 2018.
[7] Y. Chai, L. Guo, C. Wang, Y. Liu, and Z. Zhao, “Hierarchical distributed
voltage optimization method for HV and MV distribution networks,”
IEEE Trans. Smart Grid, vol. 11, no. 2, pp. 968–980, Mar. 2020.
[8] R. Lowe, Y. Wu, A. Tamar, J. Harb, P. Abbeel, and I. Mordatch, “Multi-
agent actor-critic for mixed cooperative-competitive environments,” in
Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst. (NeurIPS), 2017, pp. 6382–6393.
[9] S. Wang et al., “A data-driven multi-agent autonomous voltage control
framework using deep reinforcement learning,” IEEE Trans. Power Syst.,
vol. 35, no. 6, pp. 4644–4654, Nov. 2020.
[10] X. Sun and J. Qiu, “Two-stage volt/var control in active distribution
networks with multi-agent deep reinforcement learning method,” IEEE
Trans. Smart Grid, vol. 12, no. 4, pp. 2903–2912, Jul. 2021.
[11] H. Liu, C. Zhang, Q. Chai, K. Meng, Q. Guo, and Z. Y. Dong, “Robust
regional coordination of inverter-based volt/var control via multi-agent
deep reinforcement learning,” IEEE Trans. Smart Grid, vol. 12, no. 6,
pp. 5420–5433, Nov. 2021.
[12] D. Cao, W. Hu, J. Zhao, Q. Huang, Z. Chen, and F. Blaabjerg, “A
multi-agent deep reinforcement learning based voltage regulation using
coordinated PV inverters,” IEEE Trans. Power Syst., vol. 35, no. 5,
pp. 4120–4123, Sep. 2020.
[13] H. Liu and W. Wu, “Online multi-agent reinforcement learning for
decentralized inverter-based volt-VAR control,” IEEE Trans. Smart Grid,
vol. 12, no. 4, pp. 2980–2990, Jul. 2021.
[14] D. Cao et al., “Data-driven multi-agent deep reinforcement learning for
distribution system decentralized voltage control with high penetration
of PVs,” IEEE Trans. Smart Grid, vol. 12, no. 5, pp. 4137–4150,
Sep. 2021.
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Texas at Arlington. Downloaded on June 27,2026 at 06:17:33 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

5772
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SMART GRID, VOL. 15, NO. 6, NOVEMBER 2024
[15] D. Cao et al., “Deep reinforcement learning enabled physical-model-free
two-timescale voltage control method for active distribution systems,”
IEEE Trans. Smart Grid, vol. 13, no. 1, pp. 149–165, Jan. 2022.
[16] P. Chen, S. Liu, X. Wang, and I. Kamwa, “Physics-shielded multi-agent
deep reinforcement learning for safe active voltage control with photo-
voltaic/battery energy storage systems,” IEEE Trans. Smart Grid,vol. 14,
no. 4, pp. 2656–2667, Jul. 2023.
[17] P. Sunehag et al., “Value-decomposition networks for cooperative multi-
agent learning,” 2017, arXiv:1706.05296.
[18] T. Rashid, M. Samvelyan, C. Schroeder, G. Farquhar, J. Foerster, and
S. Whiteson, “QMIX: Monotonic value function factorisation for deep
multi-agent reinforcement learning,” in Proc. 35th Int. Conf. Mach.
Learn., Stockholm, Sweden, 2018, pp. 4295–4304.
[19] H. Liu and W. Wu, “Federated reinforcement learning for decentralized
voltage control in distribution networks,” IEEE Trans. Smart Grid,
vol. 13, no. 5, pp. 3840–3843, Sep. 2022.
[20] D. Cao, J. Zhao, W. Hu, F. Ding, Q. Huang, and Z. Chen, “Attention
enabled multi-agent DRL for decentralized volt-VAR control of active
distribution system using PV inverters and SVCs,” IEEE Trans. Sustain.
Energy, vol. 12, no. 3, pp. 1582–1592, Jul. 2021.
[21] L. Yu et al., “Multi-agent deep reinforcement learning for HVAC control
in commercial buildings,” IEEE Trans. Smart Grid, vol. 12, no. 1,
pp. 407–419, Jan. 2021.
[22] D. Hu, Z. Ye, Y. Gao, Z. Ye, Y. Peng, and N. Yu, “Multi-agent deep
reinforcement learning for voltage control with coordinated active and
reactive power optimization,” IEEE Trans. Smart Grid, vol. 13, no. 6,
pp. 4873–4886, Nov. 2022.
[23] D. Cao et al., “Physics-informed graphical representation-enabled deep
reinforcement learning for robust distribution system voltage control,”
IEEE Trans. Smart Grid, vol. 15, no. 1, pp. 233–246, Jan. 2024.
[24] Q. Xing, Y. Xu, and Z. Chen, “A bilevel graph reinforcement learning
method for electric vehicle ﬂeet charging guidance,” IEEE Trans. Smart
Grid, vol. 14, no. 4, pp. 3309–3312, Jul. 2023.
[25] R. S. Sutton and A. G. Barto, Reinforcement Learning: An Introduction,
vol. 1. Cambridge, MA, USA: MIT Press, 1998.
[26] M. L. Littman, “Markov games as a framework for multi-agent rein-
forcement learning,” in Proc. 11th Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 1994,
pp. 157–163.
[27] T. Haarnoja et al., “Soft actor-critic algorithms and applications,” 2019,
arxiv:1812.05905.
[28] Y. Yang et al., “Qatten: A general framework for cooperative multiagent
reinforcement learning,” 2020, arxiv:2002.03939.
[29] A. Vaswani et al., “Attention is all you need,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf.
Process. Syst., 2017, pp. 5998–6008.
[30] L. Pinto, J. Davidson, R. Sukthankar, and A. Gupta, “Robust adversarial
reinforcement learning,” in Proc. 34th Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2017,
pp. 2817–2826.
[31] H. Liu and W. Wu, “Two-stage deep reinforcement learning for inverter-
based volt-VAR control in active distribution networks,” IEEE Trans.
Smart Grid, vol. 12, no. 3, pp. 2037–2047, May 2021.
[32] H. Zhang et al., “Robust deep reinforcement learning against adversarial
perturbations on state observations,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process.
Syst., 2020, pp. 21024–21037.
[33] Q. Shen, Y. Li, H. Jiang, Z. Wang, and T. Zhao, “Deep reinforcement
learning with robust and smooth policy,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach.
Learn., 2020, pp. 8707–8718.
[34] S. B. Gelfand and S. K. Mitter, “Recursive stochastic algorithms for
global optimization in Rd,” SIAM J. Control Optim., vol. 29, no. 5,
pp. 999–1018, Sep. 1991.
[35] M. E. Baran and F. F. Wu, “Network reconﬁguration in distribution
systems for loss reduction and load balancing,” IEEE Trans. Power Del.,
vol. 4, no. 2, pp. 1401–1407, Apr. 1989.
[36] H. M. Khodr, F. G. Olsina, P. M. De Oliveira-De Jesus, and J. M. Yusta,
“Maximum savings approach for location and sizing of capacitors
in distribution systems,” Electr. Power Syst. Res., vol. 78, no. 7,
pp. 1192–1203, Jul. 2008.
[37] J. Wang, W. Xu, Y. Gu, W. Song, and T. C. Green, “Multi-agent
reinforcement learning for active voltage control on power distribution
networks,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2021, pp. 1–14.
Xu
Yang
(Graduate
Student
Member,
IEEE)
received
the
B.S.
degree
from
the
Electrical
Engineering
Department,
Tsinghua
University,
Beijing, China, in 2022, where he is currently
pursuing the Ph.D. degree. His research interests
include active distribution system operation and
control, safe and robust reinforcement learning and
its application in the energy system.
Haotian
Liu
received
the
B.S.
and
Ph.D.
degrees from the Electrical Engineering Department,
Tsinghua
University,
Beijing,
China,
in
2018
and 2023, respectively, where he is currently a
Postdoctor. His research interests include active dis-
tribution system operation and control, model-free
control, machine learning especially reinforcement
learning, and their applications in the energy system.
Wenchuan Wu (Fellow, IEEE) received the B.S.,
M.S.,
and
Ph.D.
degrees
from
the
Electrical
Engineering
Department,
Tsinghua
University,
Beijing,
China,
in
1996,
1998,
and
2003,
respectively, where he is currently a Full Professor.
His research interests include energy management
system, active distribution system operation and
control, machine learning, and its application in
energy system.
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Texas at Arlington. Downloaded on June 27,2026 at 06:17:33 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
