Robust Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning with Social Empowerment for
Coordination and Communication
Tessa van der Heiden,1 Herke van Hoof, 2 Efstratios Gavves, 2 Christoph Salge 3
1 BMW Group
2 University of Amsterdam
3 University of Hertfordshire
tessa.heiden@bmw.de, h.c.vanhoof@uva.nl, egavves@uva.nl, c.salge@herts.ac.uk
Abstract
We consider the problem of robust multi-agent reinforcement
learning (MARL) for cooperative communication and coordi-
nation tasks. MARL agents, mainly those trained in a central-
ized way, can be brittle because they can overﬁt to their train-
ing partners. This overﬁtting can produce agents that adopt
policies that act under the expectation that other agents will
act a certain way rather than react to their actions. Our objec-
tive is to bias the learning process towards ﬁnding strategies
that remain reactive towards others’ behavior. Social empow-
erment measures the potential inﬂuence between agents’ ac-
tions. We propose it as an additional reward term, so agents
better adapt to other agents’ actions. We show that the pro-
posed method results in obtaining higher rewards faster and a
higher success rate in three cooperative communication and
coordination tasks.
1
Introduction
Multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) holds consid-
erable promise to help address a variety of cooperative
multi-agent problems. However, a problem with MARL is
that agents can derive strong policies that are overﬁtted to
their partners’ behavior. Speciﬁcally, with centralized train-
ing agents can adopt strategies that expect other agents to
act in a certain way rather than react to their actions. Such
systems are undesirable as they may fail when their partners
alter their strategies or have to collaborate with novel part-
ners, either during the learning or deployment phase.
Robust Reinforcement learning (RL) was introduced by
Morimoto and Doya (2005) considering the generalization
ability of the learned policy in the single-agent setting. We
consider robustness to be a training agent’s ability to deal
with changes in the other agents’ behavior.
Our objective is to obtain multi-agent policies that avoid
this speciﬁc lack of robustness and stay reactive to changes
in other agents’ policy. Agents acting without any sensor
input and attention towards their partners cannot have this
ability. We want to introduce an additional reward to bias
learning towards socially reactive strategies - which should
fulﬁl the following constraints: 1) it should, with minimal
adaptation, apply to a wide range of problems with different
sensor-actuator conﬁgurations, to preserve the universality
of the RL framework, 2) it should not negatively affect the
performance, i.e., once good policies are found, it should
not harm exploitation. Optimizing for the mutual informa-
tion between agents’ actions (Jaques et al. 2019), requires
the agents’ policies to have a certain degree of entropy and
this might interfere with an exploitation strategy. Fulﬁlling
the above criteria would provide a general-purpose multi-
agent learning algorithm for various cooperative tasks.
2
Related work
2.1
Robust Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning
There is a large body of research on constructing agents that
are robust to their partners. In self-play, for example, agents
train against themselves rather than a ﬁxed opponent strat-
egy to prevent developing exploitable strategies (Tesauro
1994). Population based-training goes one step further by
training agents to play against a population of other agents
rather than only a copy of itself. For instance, Jaderberg et al.
(2018) and Lowe et al. (2017) train an ensemble of policies
with a variety of collaborators and competitors. By using a
whole population rather than only a copy of itself, the agent
is forced to be robust to a wide variety of potential pertur-
bations instead of a single perturbation. However, it requires
a great deal of engineering because the policy parameters
suitable for the previous environment are not necessarily the
next stage’s best initialization.
Some works combine the minimax framework and
MARL to ﬁnd policies that are robust to opponents with dif-
ferent strategies. Minimax is a concept in game theory that
can be applied to ﬁnd an approach that minimizes the pos-
sible loss in a worst-case scenario (Osborne et al. 2004). Li
et al. (2019) use it during training to optimize the reward
for each agent under the assumption that all other agents act
adversarial. We are interested in methods that can deal with
perturbations in the training partners’ behavior, which dif-
fers from dealing with partners with various strategies.
In zero-shot coordination, agents need to cooperate with
novel partners that are not seen during training. Other-play
(Hu et al. 2020) constructs zero-shot coordination strategies
by making their agents robust to how their partners break
symmetries in the underlying system. We instead frame our
problem as one-shot adaptation, i.e. our policy should be
able to quickly adapt if the other agents alter their policies.
arXiv:2012.08255v1  [cs.MA]  15 Dec 2020

2.2
Intrinsic Social Motivation
Due to centralized training in MARL, agents might adopt
non-reactive strategies that may struggle with other agents’
changing behaviors. Social intrinsic motivation can give an
additional incentive to ﬁnd reactive policies towards other
agents.
Intrinsic motivation (IM) in RL refers to reward func-
tions that allow agents to learn interesting behavior, some-
times in the absence of an environmental reward (Chentanez,
Barto, and Singh 2005). Computational models of IM are
generally separated into two categories (Santucci, Baldas-
sarre, and Mirolli 2012), (Baldassarre and Mirolli 2013),
those that focus on curiosity (Burda et al. 2018), (Pathak
et al. 2017) and exploration (Gregor, Rezende, and Wierstra
2016), (Eysenbach et al. 2018), and those that focus on com-
petence and control (Oudeyer and Kaplan 2009), (Karl et al.
2017). The information-theoretic Empowerment formalism
is in the latter category, trying to capture how much an agent
is in control of the world it can perceive. Empowerment
has produced robust behaviour linked to controllability, op-
erationality and self-preservation - in both robots (van der
Heiden et al. 2020), (Karl et al. 2017), (Leu et al. 2013)
and simulations (Guckelsberger, Salge, and Colton 2016),
with (de Abril and Kanai 2018) and without (Guckelsberger,
Salge, and Togelius 2018) reinforcement learning and neural
network approximations (Karl et al. 2017).
Empowerment has also been applied to multi-agent simu-
lations, under the term of coupled empowerment maximiza-
tion (Guckelsberger, Salge, and Colton 2016), in which it
was used to produce supportive and antagonistic behavior.
Of particular interest is the idea of transfer empowerment
- a measure that quantiﬁes behaviors such as collaboration,
coordination, and lead-taking (Salge and Polani 2017). Em-
powerment has also been tested in collaborative scenarios
involving humans and robots. In all scenarios, transfer em-
powerment provides an additional incentive for agents to in-
teract and coordinate.
There are similar techniques that quantify the interaction
between agents for improving coordination between agents.
Barton et al. (2018) analyze the degree of dependence be-
tween two agents’ policies to measure coordination, speciﬁ-
cally by using Convergence Cross Mapping (CCM). Strouse
et al. (2018) show how agents can share (or hide) intentions
by maximising the mutual information between actions and
a categorical goal. One notably relevant work is by Jaques
et al. (2019) that design social inﬂuence which is the inﬂu-
ence of one agent on the policies of other agents, measured
by the mutual information between action pairs of distinct
agents. In contrast to social inﬂuence, transfer empowerment
considers the potential mutual information or channel capac-
ity. When optimizing for actual mutual information, then its
value is bounded from above by the lowest entropy of both
agent’s action variables. This might easily interfere with an
exploitation strategy and may need to be regularized once
a good strategy is found. On the other hand, empowerment
does not have this limitation and the action sets could have
very narrow distributions.
3
Preliminaries
Let us consider a Dec-POMDP, an extension of the MDP
for multi-agent systems, being both decentralized and par-
tially observable (Nair et al., 2003). This means that each of
the n agents conditions the choice of its action on its partial
observation of the world. It is deﬁned by the following tu-
ple: (S, A, T, O, O, R, n). S is the set of true global states,
while O = ⊗i∈[1,..,n]Oi is the set of joint local observations
and A = ⊗i∈[1,..,n]Ai the set of possible joint actions. At
each time step, the state transition function T maps the joint
action and state to a new state, with probability distribution
P(st+1|st, at).
We consider fully cooperative tasks, so agents share a re-
ward rt which is conditioned on the joint action and state. R
is the reward function that maps the state and joint actions
into a single scalar reward.
4
Methodology
In the introduction, we have argued that agents that are
trained in a centralized manner can adopt brittle policies and
perform poorly, even in simple coordination tasks. The rea-
son is that they adopt strategies that expect other agents will
act in a certain way rather than observe and anticipate their
actions.
This section aims to describe an additional heuristic that
biases the learning process in obtaining policies towards
those that are reactive towards other agents’ actions.
First we introduce our speciﬁc version of transfer empow-
erment, that rewards the idea of an agent being responsive to
adaptations in the other’s policy. Transfer empowerment is
computed for a each pair of agents, which scales quadrati-
cally with the number of agents.
By adopting the framework of centralized training, we can
compute empowerment over the joint action and states. This
notion captures the causal inﬂuence of all agents’ actions
on the overall resulting state. Since it is calculated over the
joint actions and states and not per pair, we arrive at a more
scalable solution.
4.1
Transfer Empowerment
Suppose there are two agents, j and k, both taking actions
and changing the overall state. Each time agent k takes an
action, the state of agent j is modiﬁed and therefore agent j’s
policy conditions on it. The objective of coordination is that
by modifying the actions of agent k , agent j also reliably
adapts its actions. Here we look at transfer empowerment,
namely the potential causal inﬂuence that one agent has on
another. It is computed for pairs of agents by maximizing the
mutual information I between one agent’s action ak
t and an-
other agent’s action aj
t+1 at a later point in time, conditioned
on the current and next state, st and st+1 respectively:
ET,k→j(st) = max
ωk I
h
aj
t+1, ak
t |st
i
(1)
Here, ωk(ak
t+1|st+1) is the hypothetical policy of agent
k, that takes an action ak
t+1 after observing state st+1 and
inﬂuencing aj
t+2 at a later time step.

Our version of transfer empowerment differs slightly from
the one introduced by (Salge and Polani 2017), as we con-
sider the potential information ﬂow, or channel capacity, be-
tween one agent’s action and another agent’s action at a later
point in time. Salge and Polani (2017) consider the empow-
erment between one agent’s action and another agent’s sen-
sor state. Transfer empowerment to another agent’s sensor
captures the direct inﬂuence to change the other agents en-
vironment, and also inﬂuencing the agent to take certain ac-
tions, which then inﬂuences their world. Using transfer em-
powerment to another agent’s action focuses on just the in-
ﬂuence that affects the other agent’s decision. Since an agent
is usually in control of their actions, inﬂuence on their action
has to ﬂow through their sensor and be mediated by their
policy. In other words, they have to react to the ﬁrst agent’s
actions. This is more in line with our goal of biasing a policy
towards more reactive strategies.
Transfer empowerment has ties with but is different from
social inﬂuence (Jaques et al. 2019). Social inﬂuence is the
mutual information between agents’ actions. It is high when
both action variables have a certain entropy, i.e., that dif-
ferent actions are performed. Once an acceptable policy is
found, e.g. towards end of training, a high entropy policy
distribution might actually be suboptimal. Empowerment on
the other hand, considers the potential and not actual infor-
mation ﬂow, so the agent will only calculate how it could
have affected the other agent, rather than actually carry out
its potential. As such, action sets can have very narrow dis-
tributions, as long as the system would still be reactive if
those actions change. Therefore it does not interfere with
the constraints stated earlier.
Here we described transfer empowerment computed from
agent k’s actions to agent’s j’ action, denoted by ET,k→j.
ET,1:n→j = Pn
i=1
i̸=j ET,i→j is the extension for multiple
agents and results in agent j being reactive to agents’ ac-
tions. The main goal is to train a behavioral policy πj to
maximize the transfer empowerment, which is done by esti-
mating ET with ωk and by changing πj.
4.2
Joint Empowerment as Scalable Proxy
Ideally, we would want to compute the transfer empow-
erment from all agents to all other agents. However, this
grows quadratically and might become quickly infeasible.
Therefore we introduce joint empowerment as a better com-
putable heuristic proxy. We consider multiple agent with
ω = [ω1, ω2, ..., ωn] denoting the joint policy. Since we can
adopt the framework of centralized training with decentral-
ized execution, policies are allowed to use all agents’ local
observations during training. Joint empowerment EJ(at, st)
is computed over the joint action at and next state st+1 for
all agents:
EJ(st) = max
ω
I [st+1, at|st]
(2)
This is the empowerment from all agent’s actions to the state
at a later point in time. It captures the causal inﬂuence of all
agents actions on the overall resulting state. It also provides
an upper bound on each single agent self-empowerment, a
measure associated with robust single-agent behavior. It also
provides a measure of the agents’ collective empowerment
if seen as a single organism. As such, it might also favor
strategies that keep the overall population operational and
increase their controllability over the world, which may pos-
itively affect the learning rate and performance.
This reward is preferred in systems with many agents
as it scales linearly with the number of agents, rather than
quadratic.
4.3
Training with Social Empowerment
In summary, training with joint and transfer empowerment
results in joint policies that are reactive, because for em-
powerment to be high it requires considering the decisions
of others. As such, social empowerment rewards a very gen-
eralized idea of coordination that requires paying attention
to each other and reliably reacting to a variation in their ac-
tions. While empowerment does not care how this reaction
looks, or even if it is good, combined with the actual reward
should lead to the selection of a strategy that both solves the
problem, while also avoiding the brittleness that comes from
not being reactive to information from other agents. Specif-
ically, we will modify an agent’s reward function Ri so that
it becomes:
Ri,t(st+1, at, st) = r(at, st) + E(st+1)
(3)
where r is the environmental reward and E can be either
transfer ET or joint EJ empowerment. Policies π that are
trained with EJ jointly select actions that result in highly
empowered states (like in classical empowerment algo-
rithms). A policy πj trained with ET,n→j selects more re-
active actions, therefore also increases the empowerment of
states.
4.4
Lower bound on E
Many works on empowerment operate in discrete action-
state space because the computation requires integrating
over all possible actions and states, which in many cases
is intractable. We choose to operate in continuous action-
state space to extend the applicability of our approach. Karl
et al. (2017) introduced an efﬁcient implementation to esti-
mate empowerment that maximises a lower bound on mutual
information (Barber and Agakov 2003). The lower bound
on empowerment contains a source distribution, ω(at, st)
and a variational approximation of the planning distribution,
q(at|st+1, st). By representing both distributions by a neu-
ral network, maximizing ˆI requires backpropagation using
gradient ascent. Taking inspiration from, Karl et al. (2017),
transfer empowerment can be estimated by:
ET
i (θ, φ) = ln qξ(aω
i+1|πj
φ(si+2), si+2, si+1)−ln ωk
χ(aω
i+1|si+1)
(4)
where the combination of the parameters ξ and χ are de-
noted by θ. Similarly, joint empowerment can be estimated
by:
EJ
i (θ) = ln qξ(aω
i+1|si+2, si+1) −ln ωχ(aω
i+1|si+1)
(5)
The training procedures are summarized in algorithm 1 and
2 for transfer and joint empowerment respectively. First,

Algorithm 1 πj
φ trained with ET
Set random parameters for ωχ and qξ with θ = {χ, ξ} and
πφ and Qβ. Initialize experience replay memory with mini
batches B with N transitions.
for each {si, aπ
i , si+1, ri(aπ, si)} ∈B do
ϵi = (si+1 −pψ(aπ
i , si))2
aω
i+1 ∼ωχ(si+1), si+2 ∼pψ(aω
i+1, si+1)
Estimation of ET as in eq. (4)
yi = ET
i (θ, φ) + ri + γQ′
β′(si+1, π′φ′(si+1))
end for
ψ ←ψ −λ∇ψ 1
N
PN
i ϵi
θ ←θ + λ∇θ 1
N
PN
i ET
i (θ, φ)
β ←β + λ∇β 1
N
PN
i (Qβ(si, ai) −yi)2
φ ←φ + λ∇φ 1
N
PN
i (Qβ(si, πφ(si)) + ET
i (θ, φ))
Algorithm 2 πφ trained with EJ
Set random parameters for ωχ and qξ with θ = {χ, ξ} and
πφ and Qβ, pψ trained as in algorithm 1. Initialize experi-
ence replay memory with mini batches B with N transitions.
for each {si, aπ
i , si+1, ri(aπ, si)} ∈B do
aω
i+1 ∼ωχ(si+1),
si+2 ∼pψ(aω
i+1, si+1)
Estimation of EJ as in eq. (5)
yi = EJ
i (θ) + ri + γQ′
β′(si+1, π′
φ′(si+1))
end for
θ ←θ + λ∇θ 1
N
PN
i EJ
i (θ)
β ←β + λ∇β 1
N
PN
i (Qβ(si, ai) −yi)2
φ ←φ + λ∇φ 1
N
PN
i (Qβ(si, πφ(si))
samples from the system dynamics with the behavioral pol-
icy are collected. The transition network p is trained to min-
imize the squared error between a future state and its pre-
dicted future state. In algorithm 2, the estimation of empow-
erment is done by ω, q and p. Next, it is used as an additional
reward term for the joint policy π to select actions that lead
to high-empowered states. In algorithm 1, empowerment is
estimated with the networks ω, q, p and πj. So here, πj
is trained to select actions that drive to highly empowered
states and to increase the states’ empowerment values.
5
Experimental Results
5.1
Setup
We construct three environments that test various capabil-
ities of our approach, transfer ET , joint EJ and social in-
ﬂuence SI (Jaques et al. 2019) and baselines DDPG (Lill-
icrap et al. 2015) and MADDPG (Lowe et al. 2017). The
MADDPG is a centralized version of the DDPG, meaning
the value function of each agent conditions on the observa-
tions of all agents.
We ﬁrst analyze the robustness of the methods by look-
ing at the training curves. During training, all agents change
their policies and a robust learning method should deal with
Training Curves
(i) Cover Landmarks
(ii) Speaker Listener
Figure 1: Training curves for Cover Landmarks and Speaker
Listener tasks. — DDPG — MADDPG — SI — E
these perturbations. Second, we assess each method’s abil-
ity to obtain reactive agents. We analyze this in a simula-
tor with two agents, one sending messages and the other
receiving them. The task can only be fulﬁlled if messages
are correctly decoded, and random action taking is avoided.
Third, we evaluate each method’s ability to construct agents
that remain responsive to its partners and not rely upon ex-
pectations. We hypothesize that centralized training does not
incentivize this behavior. To this end, we utilize a simulator
containing multiple particles that need to cover distinct land-
marks. If agents collide or go to the same landmark, we con-
sider them not be reactive to each other. Last, we compare
methods in a more complicated multi-agent car simulator
and analyze their performance in more real-world scenarios.
The ﬁrst two scenarios are constructed by OpenAI’s
Multi-Agent Particle Environment 1. We choose this sim-
ulator, since we are primarily interested in addressing agent
interaction and are satisﬁed with relatively simple physics,
i.e. it only contains inertia and friction. Transfer empow-
erment is evaluated in the ﬁrst experiment and joint em-
powerment in the second. The last experiment is done in
a simulator that is a combination of the multi-agent and
single agent OpenAI Gym 2. It allows to evaluate more
complicated interactions, e.g. merging and overtaking be-
haviors.The code for the simulator can be found on https:
//github.com/tessavdheiden/social empowerment
5.2
Training with Empowerment
During training, all agents change their policies, and a ro-
bust learning method should deal with these perturbations.
We hypothesize that training with empowerment results in
robust methods because it incentivizes being responsive to
changes in others’ behaviors.
Figures 1(i) and 1(ii) show the training curves for the
baselines and our method in the ﬁrst two tasks. When an
agent has empowerment as an additional utility function the
value of the average return is higher.
1https://github.com/openai/multiagent-particle-envs
2https://github.com/openai/gym

Table 1: Percentage of episodes in which the listener reached the target landmark and average distance from the landmark.
The right columns (3rd-6th) show results of the task in which the environment contains less channels than landmarks (L=6,
C=5) and obstacles (O=6). Alternating frequency is the rate at which the speaker alters its message per episode. A low number
indicates that the speaker efﬁciently uses its communication channel.
L = 3, C = 3, O = 0
L = 6, C = 5, O = 6
Reward
Average
Target
Reward
Average
Target
Obstacle
distance
reach %
distance
reach %
hit %
DDPG
-0.439
0.456
32.0
-0.851
0.653
30.1
60.8
MADDPG
-0.301
0.133
92.0
-0.596
0.260
40.5
49.4
SI
-0.569
0.290
88.0
-0.666
0.360
31.5
51.2
ET
-0.292
0.120
91.1
-0.422
0.072
61.1
31.1
Table 2: Average percentage of collisions and successes per episode consisting of 25 time steps. Distance from landmark are
averaged over all time steps. An episode is successful if all agents are within .1 distance to a distinct landmarks at the last 5
time steps. Shaded areas indicate best (dark grey) and second best (light grey) numbers.
Reward
Average distance
Collisions %
Success %
DDPG
-2.302
1.324
50.0
69.3
MADDPG
-2.198
1.108
53.3
80.5
SI
-2.461
1.459
70.3
61.9
ET
-2.098
0.857
43.3
89.9
EJ
-2.063
0.957
13.3
95.9
5.3
Experiment I: Cooperative Communication
The ﬁrst task involves one silent moving agent (j) and
the other one (k) sending messages that help navigate the
listening agent. The objective for the moving agent is to
reach a target landmark out of L landmarks by decoding the
speaker’s message (a symbol chosen from C distinct sym-
bols). The team reward is the Euclidean distance from the
target landmark. The task requires both agents to reliably
act and pay attention to each other’s actions. The agents can
fail if the speaker outputs random symbols or if the listener
incorrectly decodes or ignores the messages.
If L = C, the speaker simply needs to output a unique
symbol identifying the target landmark. By having more
landmarks than distinct symbols, i.e. L > C, the speaker is
forced to send more indicative signals, e.g. indicating move-
ment direction. Last, by adding O obstacles that are only vis-
ible to the speaker, the listener is challenged more to decode
the messages correctly and navigate precisely.
Table 1 shows the performance of the baselines and our
method on the two versions of this task. We present ET,k→j
which should motivate the listener (j) to adapt its policy to
be more responsive to the messages. ET,j→k should have
the speaker adapt its policy. However, as the messages are
not blocked, there is little in term of policy change for the
speaker that is helpful to increase the empowerment.
The lowest number of obstacle hits was obtained by train-
ing with ET,k→j. This can be explained by the listener’s pol-
icy adaptation to decode the messages and navigate better.
Fig. 2 shows an episode. DDPG does not reach the target
and hits obstacles, see 2(i) . While MADDPG avoids the
obstacles (see, 2(ii)), it remains at a larger distance from the
target than our method, in 2(iii).
Speaker Listener Task
(i) DDPG
(ii) MADDPG
(iii) ET,k→j
Figure 2: The listener (big blue circle) has to move to a target
landmark (blue small circle) out of L = 6 landmarks (black
small circles) while avoiding the obstacles (red crosses). The
sender can only send messages of length C = 5 < L.
5.4
Experiment II: Cooperative Navigation
In this task three agents have to move to three distinct land-
marks. They are not told to go to a speciﬁc one, but rather
need to attend and react to their partners and choose distinct
ones. They observe the relative coordinates to their partners
and landmarks. The team reward is the Euclidean distance
between a landmark and the closed agent, summed over all
landmarks and agents obtain a penalty for colliding with
each other. If agents collide or go to the same landmark, we
consider them not to be reactive to each other. We hypoth-
esize that joint empowerment has agents moving to distinct
landmarks faster without colliding and thus obtain a higher
reward.
Table 2 presents results. Our method achieves the lowest
average distance and the lowest number of collisions. Near

Table 3: Three cars need to avoid collisions and obstacles on the road. All agents are rewarded for staying on the road and
penalized if they hit an obstacle or another car.
Junctions
Obstacles
Off road %
Collisions %
Obstacle hit %
Collisions %
MADDPG
11.8
12.7
29.3
31.9
EJ
6.6
5.6
15.9
12.4
collisions are avoided by using joint empowerment as addi-
tional reward, because it is low in states in which the agents
have low maneuverability.
Cover Landmarks Task
(i) DDPG
(ii) MADDPG
(iii) EJ
Figure 3: The task of the agents (big circles) is to reach dis-
tinct landmarks (small circles). Each 3rd time step is shown
(from transparent to opaque).
Fig. 3 shows a full episode. The three agents are the big
colored circles and the landmarks are the smaller black ones.
MADDPG and MADDPG+E reach distinct landmarks. Em-
powerment captures the causal inﬂuence of all agents’ ac-
tions on the overall resulting state and agents avoid states
with limited maneuverability. This can be seen by the blue
agent that does not move to the closest landmark, but rather
one that is further away from its green partner (iii). MAD-
DPG has two colliding agents. See Fig. (ii).
5.5
Experiment III: Cooperative Driving
In the last task we consider three autonomous vehicles that
have to interact in novel trafﬁc situations. The simulator con-
tains physical properties such as road friction and inertia.
Agents observe a stack of 4 top view grey scale images,
centered around their center of mass from which they need
to infer the relative location of their partners and obstacles,
and their own speed. They are rewarded by the number of
pixels in their observation corresponding to the color of the
road, motivating them to stay on the road, and are penalized
for colliding with each other.
Intersections and obstacles are added to assess the agents’
abilities to react in time to others. For example, if multiple
agents enter a point where two roads meet or a location with
many obstacles, agents can collide if neither one gives way.
We therefore count the number of collisions and obstacle
hits.
Table 3 shows the two different scenarios, the road with
junctions and obstacles. Agents trained with empowerment
results in agents outperforming the MADDPG on all met-
rics.
In Fig 4 we show two snapshots in the two scenarios. The
agents that are trained with the MADDPG come closer to
each other and respond very late. In contrast, when using EJ
the vehicles respond quicker and give others space to merge
in or to avoid obstacles. Agents (blue car) give way, see (ii)
and (iv), to let the other cars (green, red) pass.
Cooperative Driving
(i) MADDPG
(ii) EJ
(iii) MADDPG
(iv) EJ
Figure 4: Comparison in the dynamic car simulator in which
3 vehicles need to merge (i), (ii) and avoid obstacles (iii), (iv)
while staying on the road and keeping safe distance between
each other.
Technical details
All methods are trained for 25k episodes, each episode con-
sisting of 25 time-steps in the ﬁrst two task and 50 time-
steps in the last. The hyper-parameters as well as the op-
timization algorithm are equal to (Lowe et al. 2017). In
the last experiment agents obtained a stack of 4 images
and all networks had a 5-layered CNN to convert the stack
into a single-dimension vector. The code for the implemen-
tation can be found on https://github.com/tessavdheiden/
social empowerment
6
Conclusions and Future Work
In this paper, we consider the problem of agents that over-
ﬁt to their training partners and that adapt strategies that act
under certain expectations, rather than react to their actions.
We propose to use social empowerment that biases the learn-
ing process to construct agents that remain reactive to their
partners’ behaviors.
In three experiments we show how empowerment moti-
vates the construction of agents that are responsive to each
other’s behavior. We have explained different variants, trans-
fer empowerment that can be applied between a pair of
agents, and a faster computational variant, joint empower-
ment, which can be applied for a group of agents with any
size.

Our method, uses centralized training with decentralized
execution, thus can be deployed with local partial observa-
tions of the policies. We show that not only agents coordi-
nate better by taking into account the dynamics of the whole
group, but also more precisely, avoiding dangerous situa-
tions.
An exciting direction of research, which we have not ex-
plored is cooperation with partners that agents have not seen
during training, e.g. humans. Furthermore, many real-life
scenarios have competitive aspects, and agents can also be
trained by minimizing the empowerment of their opponents.
Focusing on the before mentioned problems allows tackling
a large number of scenarios, such as robots developed by
different brands that need to interact with humans.
References
Baldassarre, G.; and Mirolli, M. 2013. Intrinsically moti-
vated learning in natural and artiﬁcial systems. Springer.
Barber, D.; and Agakov, F. V. 2003. The IM algorithm: a
variational approach to information maximization. In Ad-
vances in neural information processing systems.
Barton, S. L.; Waytowich, N. R.; Zaroukian, E.; and Asher,
D. E. 2018. Measuring collaborative emergent behavior in
multi-agent reinforcement learning. In International Con-
ference on Human Systems Engineering and Design: Future
Trends and Applications, 422–427. Springer.
Burda, Y.; Edwards, H.; Pathak, D.; Storkey, A.; Darrell, T.;
and Efros, A. A. 2018. Large-scale study of curiosity-driven
learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1808.04355 .
Chentanez, N.; Barto, A. G.; and Singh, S. P. 2005. Intrin-
sically motivated reinforcement learning.
In Advances in
neural information processing systems, 1281–1288.
de Abril, I. M.; and Kanai, R. 2018. A uniﬁed strategy for
implementing curiosity and empowerment driven reinforce-
ment learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1806.06505 .
Eysenbach, B.; Gupta, A.; Ibarz, J.; and Levine, S. 2018.
Diversity is all you need: Learning skills without a reward
function. arXiv preprint arXiv:1802.06070 .
Gregor, K.; Rezende, D. J.; and Wierstra, D. 2016. Varia-
tional intrinsic control. arXiv preprint arXiv:1611.07507 .
Guckelsberger, C.; Salge, C.; and Colton, S. 2016. Intrin-
sically motivated general companion npcs via coupled em-
powerment maximisation.
In 2016 IEEE Conference on
Computational Intelligence and Games (CIG), 1–8. IEEE.
Guckelsberger, C.; Salge, C.; and Togelius, J. 2018.
New and surprising ways to be mean. adversarial npcs
with coupled empowerment minimisation. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1806.01387 .
Hu, H.; Lerer, A.; Peysakhovich, A.; and Foerster, J. 2020.
” Other-Play” for Zero-Shot Coordination. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2003.02979 .
Jaderberg, M.; Czarnecki, W.; Dunning, I.; Marris, L.;
Lever, G.; Castaneda, A.; et al. 2018. Human-level perfor-
mance in ﬁrst-person multiplayer games with population-
based deep reinforcement learning. arXiv.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:1807.01281 .
Jaques, N.; Lazaridou, A.; Hughes, E.; Gulcehre, C.; Ortega,
P.; Strouse, D.; Leibo, J. Z.; and De Freitas, N. 2019. Social
inﬂuence as intrinsic motivation for multi-agent deep rein-
forcement learning. In International Conference on Machine
Learning, 3040–3049. PMLR.
Karl, M.; Soelch, M.; Becker-Ehmck, P.; Benbouzid, D.;
van der Smagt, P.; and Bayer, J. 2017.
Unsupervised
real-time control through variational empowerment. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1710.05101 .
Leu, A.; Risti´c-Durrant, D.; Slavni´c, S.; Glackin, C.; Salge,
C.; Polani, D.; Badii, A.; Khan, A.; and Raval, R. 2013.
CORBYS cognitive control architecture for robotic follower.
In Proceedings of the 2013 IEEE/SICE International Sym-
posium on System Integration, 394–399. IEEE.
Li, S.; Wu, Y.; Cui, X.; Dong, H.; Fang, F.; and Russell, S.
2019. Robust multi-agent reinforcement learning via mini-
max deep deterministic policy gradient. In Proceedings of
the AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence, volume 33,
4213–4220.
Lillicrap, T. P.; Hunt, J. J.; Pritzel, A.; Heess, N.; Erez, T.;
Tassa, Y.; Silver, D.; and Wierstra, D. 2015.
Continuous
control with deep reinforcement learning.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:1509.02971 .
Lowe, R.; Wu, Y. I.; Tamar, A.; Harb, J.; Abbeel, O. P.;
and Mordatch, I. 2017. Multi-agent actor-critic for mixed
cooperative-competitive environments. In Advances in neu-
ral information processing systems, 6379–6390.
Morimoto, J.; and Doya, K. 2005.
Robust reinforcement
learning. Neural computation 17(2): 335–359.
Osborne, M. J.; et al. 2004. An introduction to game theory,
volume 3. Oxford university press New York.
Oudeyer, P.-Y.; and Kaplan, F. 2009. What is intrinsic moti-
vation? A typology of computational approaches. Frontiers
in neurorobotics 1: 6.
Pathak, D.; Agrawal, P.; Efros, A. A.; and Darrell, T. 2017.
Curiosity-driven exploration by self-supervised prediction.
In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision
and Pattern Recognition Workshops, 16–17.
Salge, C.; and Polani, D. 2017. Empowerment as replace-
ment for the three laws of robotics. Frontiers in Robotics
and AI 4: 25.
Santucci, V. G.; Baldassarre, G.; and Mirolli, M. 2012. In-
trinsic motivation mechanisms for competence acquisition.
In 2012 IEEE International Conference on Development
and Learning and Epigenetic Robotics (ICDL), 1–6. IEEE.
Strouse, D.; Kleiman-Weiner, M.; Tenenbaum, J.; Botvinick,
M.; and Schwab, D. J. 2018. Learning to share and hide
intentions using information regularization. In Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems, 10249–10259.
Tesauro, G. 1994. TD-Gammon, a self-teaching backgam-
mon program, achieves master-level play. Neural computa-
tion 6(2): 215–219.

van der Heiden, T.; Weiss, C.; Shankar, N. N.; Gavves, E.;
and van Hoof, H. 2020. Social navigation with human em-
powerment driven reinforcement learning.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2003.08158 .
