University of Texas at Arlington 
University of Texas at Arlington 
MavMatrix 
MavMatrix 
Computer Science and Engineering Theses 
Computer Science and Engineering Department 
Spring 2025 
Modeling Trust and Deception in Multi-Agent Reinforcement 
Modeling Trust and Deception in Multi-Agent Reinforcement 
Learning Using the Werewolf Game 
Learning Using the Werewolf Game 
Pathikkumar Dharmeshbhai Patel 
The University of Texas at Arlington 
Follow this and additional works at: https://mavmatrix.uta.edu/cse_theses 
 Part of the Artificial Intelligence and Robotics Commons, and the Cognitive Science Commons 
Recommended Citation 
Recommended Citation 
Patel, Pathikkumar Dharmeshbhai, "Modeling Trust and Deception in Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning 
Using the Werewolf Game" (2025). Computer Science and Engineering Theses. 529. 
https://mavmatrix.uta.edu/cse_theses/529 
This Thesis is brought to you for free and open access by the Computer Science and Engineering Department at 
MavMatrix. It has been accepted for inclusion in Computer Science and Engineering Theses by an authorized 
administrator of MavMatrix. For more information, please contact vanessa.garrett@uta.edu. 

Modeling Trust and Deception in
Multi-Agent Reinforcement
Learning Using the Werewolf Game
by
Pathikkumar D. Patel
A Thesis Report Submitted in Partial Fulfillment
of the Requirements for the Degree of
Master of Science in Computer Science
The University of Texas at Arlington
May 2025

Abstract
This thesis explores the emergence of trust, deception, and adaptive strategy in multi-
agent reinforcement learning (MARL) environments using the social deduction game
Werewolf as a simulation framework. In this environment, agents operate with hidden
roles, incomplete information, and the need to reason about others’ intentions - mirroring
the complexities of real-world social interactions.
We present and evaluate two agent architectures: Agent vA, a symbolic, heuristic-
based agent with probabilistic trust modeling and scalable memory structures; and Agent
vB, a modular Q-learning agent that learns phase-specific policies through reinforce-
ment. Agent vA relies on symbolic reasoning, bounded belief updates, and generalizable
heuristics, while Agent vB uses a finely-grained state-action space for learning detailed
strategies.
Through controlled experiments across varying population sizes and role distribu-
tions, we find that Agent vA demonstrates better scalability, robustness to environmen-
tal shifts, and early-game strategic advantage. In contrast, Agent vB learns its behavior
entirely through reinforcement, enabling the discovery of nuanced strategies tailored to
each game phase—night actions, symbolic communication, and voting. Its modular Q-
learning architecture allows for role-specific policy formation and rapid exploitation of
recurring patterns, often leading to efficient convergence and strong performance in fixed
environments.
Our results show that while reinforcement learning enables emergent deception and
collaboration, symbolic agents offer superior flexibility and performance in dynamic or
previously unseen environments. These findings provide insight into designing robust
MARL agents for adversarial and socially complex domains, with implications for trust-
worthy AI, strategic planning, and cognitive modeling.

.

Acknowledgements
First and foremost, I would like to express my deepest gratitude to my advisor, Dr.
Manfred Huber. His extraordinary patience, unwavering support, and genuine passion
for teaching have been a guiding light throughout my academic journey. No matter how
confused or lost I felt, Dr. Huber always responded with calm clarity, kindness, and
encouragement. His ability to mentor without judgment and to teach with humility has
not only shaped my research but also left a lasting impact on me personally. I consider
myself incredibly fortunate to have had the opportunity to learn under his guidance.
I would also like to sincerely thank the members of my thesis committee for their
valuable feedback and thoughtful suggestions, which have been instrumental in shaping
this work.
My deepest appreciation goes to my family—my mother, father, and grandmother—for
their unconditional love, sacrifices, and belief in me. Their support has been the foun-
dation of all that I’ve achieved. I also carry the memory of my late grandfather, whose
quiet strength and values continue to guide me—his presence remains with me in spirit
every step of the way. A heartfelt thanks to my extended family in Waco, who welcomed
me with open arms and made me feel at home when I was far from it. Their warmth
and genuine care turned an unfamiliar place into a second home. From home-cooked
meals and quiet support to simply being there when I needed a break, they gave me the
comfort and stability to stay focused and at peace.
Finally, to all my friends and everyone who stood by me—whether through late-night
study sessions, shared laughter, or simple encouragement—thank you for being a part of
this journey.

Contents
Title
Abstract
Acknowledgements
1
Introduction
1
2
Related Work
3
2.1
Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning in Hidden-Role Games . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Deception and Trust Modeling in MARL . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.3
Strategic Communication and Language-Based Agents
. . . . . . . . . .
4
2.4
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
3
Game Mechanics
5
3.1
Game Mechanics: Werewolf as a Strategic Environment . . . . . . . . . .
5
3.2
Role Selection and Simplification
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3.2.1
Werewolf . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3.2.2
Seer
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3.2.3
Medic
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.2.4
Villager
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.3
Game Phases
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.3.1
Night Phase . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.3.2
Day Phase . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8

4
Simulation Environment Design
10
4.1
Methodology
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
4.1.1
Simulation Design and Role Configuration . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
4.1.2
Agent Architectures
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
4.1.3
Communication Protocol . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
4.1.4
Training Setup
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
4.2
Reinforcement Learning Setup and Learning Dynamics . . . . . . . . . .
17
4.2.1
Symbolic Trust-Driven Architecture of Agent vA
. . . . . . . . .
17
4.2.2
Agent vB: Fully Reinforcement-Learned Architecture . . . . . . .
26
4.2.3
Comparative Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
5
Experimental Methodology and Results
35
5.1
Training Phase: Independent Agent Development . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
5.2
Comparative Evaluation: Agent vA vs Agent vB . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
5.2.1
Role-Based Performance Comparison . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
5.3
Self-Play Behavioral Trends: Agent vA Case Study
. . . . . . . . . . . .
40
5.3.1
Team-Level Outcomes
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
5.3.2
Role-Level Dynamics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
5.3.3
Werewolf Behavioral Trends . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
5.4
Expected Werewolf Victory Timing (Heatmap Analysis)
. . . . . . . . .
42
5.5
Conclusions and Insights . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
6
Discussion
45
6.1
Discussion of Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
6.1.1
Agent vA: Strengths in Structured Reasoning
. . . . . . . . . . .
45
6.1.2
Agent vB: Strengths in Scalability and Adaptation
. . . . . . . .
46
6.1.3
Performance Equilibrium in Hybrid Simulations . . . . . . . . . .
46
6.1.4
Role-Specific Performance Trends . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
6.1.5
Theoretical Baseline Comparison
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47

7
Limitaions
48
7.1
Discussion of Limitations and Future Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
8
Conclusion
52
Bibliography
54

List of Figures
3.1
Overall Werewolf Game Flow
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
4.1
Agent vA: Information Flowchart - Night Phase . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4.2
Agent vA: Information Flowchart - Day Phase . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4.3
Qnight: Role-Based Night Phase Learning - Each role learns optimal night
actions: kill, protect, investigate.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.4
Qconversation: Social Strategy Learning - Learns deception, role claims, and
when to stay silent. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.5
Qvote: Strategic Elimination Decisions - Learns who to eliminate based on
suspicion dynamics. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
5.1
Unique state space growth for the 7 instances of Agent vA across 500,000
7-player games. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
5.2
Growth of unique states encountered by the 7 instances of Agent vB across
approximately 100,000 games with 7 players each. The plateauing trend
indicates a reduction in novel state exploration over time. . . . . . . . . .
37
5.3
Performance convergence plot showing the fraction of games won by Were-
wolf agents over 100,000 training episodes. The curve flattens around 0.69,
indicating convergence of strategic behavior. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
5.4
Win rate trends in head-to-head simulations between Agent vA and Agent
vB. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
5.5
Win rates, survival rates, and elimination timing per role in vA self-play.
41

5.6
Werewolf win rate progression across training. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
5.7
Theoretical number of rounds required for Werewolf victory by attrition
(7 to 100 total players). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42

List of Tables
4.1
Agent vB Reward Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4.2
Agent vB’s Q-tables by Phase . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.3
Available Actions by Role and Phase . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4.4
Agent vA vs Agent vB: Learning Architecture Comparison . . . . . . . .
34
5.1
Win Rate Comparison by Role: Agent vA vs Agent vB . . . . . . . . . .
39

Chapter 1
Introduction
As artificial intelligence systems become increasingly embedded in real-world applica-
tions, the ability of autonomous agents to reason about the beliefs, intentions, and trust-
worthiness of others is gaining critical importance. In domains ranging from autonomous
vehicle coordination and financial markets to strategic games and robotic teamwork,
agents must operate under uncertainty, incomplete information, and the influence of
potentially deceptive collaborators or adversaries.
This thesis investigates how reinforcement learning (RL) agents can learn to commu-
nicate, deceive, and infer hidden roles in a dynamic, multi-agent social deduction envi-
ronment inspired by the game Werewolf [1, 2]. Social deduction games offer a compelling
testbed for modeling emergent behaviors such as trust-building, alliance formation, and
strategic misinformation [3]. These environments challenge agents to reason not only
from environmental feedback but also from the evolving social dynamics of peer agents,
making them particularly suitable for testing the capabilities of RL-based systems [4].
We propose a simulation framework in which RL agents interact repeatedly in hidden-
role environments, where deception and cooperation are both viable strategies.
Two
agent architectures are explored: a heuristic memory-based model (vA) that encodes
structured rules for trust inference and voting, and a modular Q-learning model
(vB) that learns voting and communication strategies through persistent trial-and-error
feedback. Agents engage in structured communication during each day phase, issuing
1

statements such as “accuse,” “reveal,” and “support,” which form the basis for evolving
social trust and role inference.
The key research questions addressed in this thesis are:
1. How can RL agents learn to strategically build trust or deceive others in a partially
observable, role-based environment?
2. What behavioral patterns emerge over repeated simulations as agents adjust to
social feedback, betrayal, and successful coordination?
3. Can deception emerge organically through reinforcement learning alone, without
being explicitly hardcoded?
To answer these questions, we embed agents in a simulation environment modeled on
Werewolf, with randomized roles across thousands of episodes. Each simulation includes
alternating night and day phases, structured message exchange, role-based objectives,
and win conditions reflective of real social deduction gameplay. The agents’ behaviors
are evaluated based on role-specific win rates, trust accuracy, survival metrics, and com-
munication impact.
This work contributes to the literature on multi-agent reinforcement learning [5] by
demonstrating that trust and deception can emerge as learned behaviors, rather than
scripted features, in socially grounded games. Furthermore, the framework presented
here offers a scalable platform for analyzing how artificial agents reason about hidden
roles, manipulate beliefs, and collaborate or compete under uncertainty.
2

Chapter 2
Related Work
2.1
Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning in Hidden-
Role Games
Social deduction games like Mafia1, Werewolf 2, and The Resistance: Avalon3 pose a
unique multi-agent challenge: players must identify allies vs. adversaries under hidden
roles and partial information. Foundational work includes equilibrium analysis in hidden-
role games. Carminati et al. (2024) introduced a formal equilibrium model for such games
and proved tractable strategies in Avalon [6]. Serrino et al. (2019) developed DeepRole,
a deep RL + CFR agent that achieved superhuman performance in Avalon by learning
effective strategies through belief modeling and self-play training [7].
2.2
Deception and Trust Modeling in MARL
Deception and trust modeling are central to these environments. Aitchison et al. (2021)
introduced Rescue The General (RTG), a testbed for deception-focused MARL, and
proposed Bayesian Belief Manipulation (BBM) to reward misleading behaviors [8]. Jin
1Originally developed by Dimitry Davidoff in 1986 as a psychological party game.
2A popular variant of Mafia, published as Ultimate Werewolf by Ted Alspach, B´ezier Games.
3Designed by Don Eskridge, published by Indie Boards & Cards, 2012.
3

et al. (2024) extended this by training agents that strategically choose between truth
and lies in One Night Ultimate Werewolf. Their RL-instructed language agents optimized
discussion tactics for improved voting outcomes [9].
2.3
Strategic Communication and Language-Based
Agents
Recent works combine natural language processing and MARL. Xu et al. (2023) used
GPT-based LLMs to generate candidate statements in Werewolf, with RL policies select-
ing the most strategic ones [10]. These agents achieved human-level performance. Sarkar
et al. (2025) applied a similar approach in Among Us, with agents learning to speak,
listen, and infer impostors through conversation [11]. Auxiliary prediction objectives
encouraged belief modeling and deception detection.
Other systems explore constrained communication. The AIWolf competition began
with limited utterance formats and later expanded to free chat [12]. Tsang et al. (2024)
trained agents to reason using only voting behavior, showing implicit communication
through vote patterns and confirming that rules like sequential elimination shape emer-
gent strategies [13].
2.4
Summary
This body of work shows that MARL agents can learn trust, deception, and commu-
nication strategies in hidden-role settings. From symbolic belief modeling to deep RL
with natural language, each study advances our understanding of social reasoning in AI.
Together, these results inform the design of multi-agent systems that can compete with
and outperform humans in socially complex environments.
4

Chapter 3
Game Mechanics
3.1
Game Mechanics: Werewolf as a Strategic Envi-
ronment
Social deduction games, such as Werewolf (also known as Mafia in some variants), are
interactive multiplayer games in which players assume hidden roles and use limited public
information, behavioral cues, and deductive reasoning to achieve team-specific goals.
These games are characterized by asymmetric information, strategic uncertainty, and
the interplay between deception and trust, making them a compelling and challenging
testbed for artificial intelligence research.
In Werewolf, players are secretly assigned to opposing factions: an informed minority
(the Werewolves) and an uninformed majority (the Villagers). Each round of gameplay
consists of alternating night and day phases, during which players make decisions under
conditions of incomplete information. The outcome of the game depends not only on
correct individual actions but also on the collective inference and coordination of the
group.
This dynamic and deceptive environment makes Werewolf particularly well-
suited for exploring key research areas such as reinforcement learning, belief modeling,
communication under uncertainty, and the emergence of group-level strategies.
Over time, numerous variants of the game have emerged, incorporating a wide array
5

of special roles that expand the strategic depth of the environment. For example, the
Hunter can eliminate another player upon death, the Witch has a healing potion and a
poison that can be used once per game, the Cupid links two players into a shared fate,
and the Alpha Werewolf may override traditional voting protocols. These additional
roles introduce non-linear interdependencies and complex trade-offs between deception,
protection, and sacrifice.
3.2
Role Selection and Simplification
To ensure computational feasibility and maintain a focused experimental design, this
thesis adopts a simplified yet strategically rich version of the game using four core roles.
These roles capture the essential asymmetry of the Werewolf environment while allowing
agents to engage in both deductive reasoning and adaptive communication:
3.2.1
Werewolf
Werewolves form a covert, collaborative minority team whose objective is to eliminate all
non-werewolf players without revealing their identities. During the night phase, Were-
wolves act privately and coordinate to select a single target for elimination. During the
day phase, they participate in open discussion alongside Villagers, strategically casting
accusations, deflecting suspicion, and contributing to group decisions - all while hiding
their true allegiance.
3.2.2
Seer
The Seer is a specialized investigative role aligned with the Villagers. Each night, the
Seer may investigate a single player to learn their true role. This power enables the Seer
to obtain truthful information about the hidden game state. However, the Seer’s value
is limited by their survivability: revealing their findings too early may expose them as a
high-value target to the Werewolves. Thus, the Seer must carefully balance information
6

disclosure and self-preservation.
3.2.3
Medic
The Medic provides defensive utility to the Villager faction by protecting one player
per night from potential elimination. If the chosen target is also selected by the Were-
wolves, the Medic’s intervention nullifies the kill. This introduces an additional layer of
uncertainty, enabling players to infer defensive actions indirectly. In optimal scenarios,
the Medic can prolong the Seer’s survival and shift the balance of power by selectively
protecting high-value allies.
3.2.4
Villager
Villagers are the default majority role, equipped with no special abilities. Their strength
lies in numbers and their ability to reason collectively. Villagers rely on voting patterns,
public accusations, and conversational context to detect deceptive behavior. Their deci-
sions shape the tempo of the game, and their votes are pivotal in eliminating suspected
Werewolves.
3.3
Game Phases
Each game proceeds through a structured sequence of repeated rounds, each consisting
of two distinct phases: the night phase and the day phase.
3.3.1
Night Phase
During the night phase, all players remain silent, and only the special roles perform
actions. These include:
• Werewolves: Secretly choose a player to eliminate.
• Seer: Investigate the true role of one player.
7

• Medic: Select a player to protect from possible elimination.
All night actions are executed simultaneously and are not visible to the rest of the
players. These hidden dynamics simulate real-world scenarios involving private knowl-
edge, misinformation, and probabilistic inference.
3.3.2
Day Phase
In the day phase, all players - including those without night powers - participate in public
discussion. This phase includes:
• The option to issue symbolic statements such as accusations, role claims, or de-
fenses.
• A structured voting process, where each player casts a vote to eliminate one other
player.
• Elimination of the player who receives the plurality of votes. The eliminated player’s
role is then revealed to all.
The game alternates between night and day phases until one faction satisfies its win
condition. The Villagers win if all Werewolves are eliminated. The Werewolves win
if their number becomes equal to or exceeds that of the remaining non-Werewolf players.
This alternating phase structure, shown in Figure 3.1, paired with asymmetric role
knowledge, facilitates the emergence of strategic deception, hidden alliances, and trust
modeling. These dynamics form the foundation of the simulated environment in which
reinforcement learning agents are trained and evaluated in subsequent chapters.
8

Assign Roles
Night Phase
(Werewolves, Seer, Medic)
Day Phase
(Discussion and Voting)
Victory Check
Villagers Win
Werewolves Win
Continue to Next Night Phase
Figure 3.1: Overall Werewolf Game Flow
9

Chapter 4
Simulation Environment Design
4.1
Methodology
This section describes the simulation environment, agent architectures, communication
protocol, reinforcement learning framework, and experimental setup used to investigate
trust and deception in a Werewolf-inspired multi-agent system. The goal is to evaluate
how artificial agents, guided by different learning paradigms, adapt their strategies to
varying social pressures, incomplete information, and evolving group dynamics.
4.1.1
Simulation Design and Role Configuration
The simulation replicates the structure of the social deduction game Werewolf, with
agents assigned hidden roles and participating in alternating night and day phases. Sim-
ulations were conducted across populations of 7, 14, 21, 35, and 49 agents, though the
default and most thoroughly analyzed configuration involves 21 players. Each episode
starts with a randomized role assignment from four primary roles:
• Werewolf – deceptive agents seeking to eliminate all non-werewolves.
• Seer – honest agents who can reveal one agent’s role per night.
• Medic – defensive agents who protect others from Werewolf attacks.
10

• Villager – uninformed agents who rely on communication and voting patterns to
infer roles.
Victory conditions are team-based. Villagers and allied roles win by eliminating all
Werewolves; Werewolves win if they equal or outnumber the non-Werewolves.
Each
round consists of a night phase (special role actions) and a day phase (communication
and public voting).
4.1.2
Agent Architectures
Two agent variants were developed to explore different strategies for communication, role
inference, and deception.
Agent vA: Heuristic Memory-Based Agent
Agent vA is a strategically designed, memory-driven agent that models human-like rea-
soning in multi-agent environments characterized by uncertainty and deception, such
as the Werewolf game. Unlike its learning-based counterparts, Agent vA does not rely
on deep reinforcement learning or large-scale Q-tables.
Instead, it employs a struc-
tured, heuristic approach to simulate belief formation, bounded memory, and trust-based
decision-making. Its architecture is inspired by cognitive models of bounded rationality,
where agents operate with limited information-processing capacity and rely on simplified
representations of other players’ behavior to make decisions.
At the core of Agent vA is a handcrafted trust model that tracks and updates each
agent’s belief about the roles and intentions of other players. This model is initialized
uniformly, with all roles assigned equal probabilities, and evolves throughout the game
based on accumulated evidence such as accusations, defenses, voting patterns, and role
revelations. Each player maintains a belief distribution over roles for every other partic-
ipant, adjusted using confidence-weighted heuristics. For instance, if one agent accuses
another of being a Werewolf, the belief in that accusation is adjusted based on the ac-
cuser’s reputation and the current level of suspicion. Similarly, defenses and observations
11

serve to either dampen or reinforce these beliefs. The influence of each interaction is
scaled by the speaker’s credibility, which is itself dynamically updated throughout the
game. If a player consistently makes accurate claims or aligns with successful outcomes,
their reputation increases, thus amplifying the weight of their future statements.
Crucially, Agent vA simulates a bounded memory window, a design choice that reflects
human cognitive limitations and prevents information overload. Each agent retains only
a limited number of recent belief snapshots and interaction histories—typically capped
at five rounds. These are stored in a temporal memory buffer that discards the oldest
entries when new ones are added. This constraint introduces realistic behavioral noise
and recency effects, as decisions are disproportionately influenced by recent experiences
and dominant interactions. Memory limitations are applied not only to trust calculations
but also to internal strategy selection and player profiling, ensuring that long-term trends
do not overwhelm short-term adaptability.
Decision-making in Agent vA is governed by these evolving trust scores. When re-
quired to vote during the day phase, an agent selects the least trusted alive player, as
determined by the highest estimated probability of being a Werewolf.
However, this
process is modulated by role-specific overrides. For example, if the agent is a Seer and
has successfully identified a Werewolf during the night phase, it prioritizes voting against
that known threat, regardless of the general trust rankings. This integration of private
knowledge and public inference allows agents to behave coherently with their assigned
roles and objectives.
The statement selection mechanism in Agent vA also reflects strategic awareness.
Depending on the game phase, social pressure, and prior accusations, agents choose from
a set of predefined symbolic messages. These include accusations, defenses, agreements,
and information-sharing statements.
The choice of message is influenced by internal
reward estimates for each communication strategy, which are updated across games based
on their contribution to successful outcomes. The agent thus develops a form of symbolic
strategy evolution, learning to prefer certain behaviors in specific contexts (e.g., early
aggression vs. late caution) even without explicit reinforcement learning.
12

Throughout each game, Agent vA accumulates information not only about other
players but also about itself. It maintains detailed character profiles for each role it plays,
tracking behavioral attributes such as aggression, deception, teamwork, and consistency.
These are updated based on the agent’s own actions, outcomes, and strategic choices
during gameplay. After each game, a post-processing step aggregates these observations
into success metrics and adapts future decision thresholds accordingly. Additionally, win-
loss histories by role and trust calibration strategies are preserved in persistent memory
when enabled, allowing Agent vA to improve longitudinally.
In summary, Agent vA represents a hybrid between symbolic reasoning and lightweight
adaptive memory. It offers a credible simulation of human-like play in social deduction
games, grounded in transparent decision logic and interpretable trust mechanics. By
capturing trust as a dynamic, memory-constrained function of experience and credibil-
ity, it provides a valuable baseline for evaluating more complex, learning-based agents.
Its design also facilitates introspection and analysis, making it particularly suitable for
experiments focused on understanding deception, alliance formation, and emergent strat-
egy in multi-agent environments.
• Trust Update – Heuristic trust updates inspired by Bayesian reasoning.
• Memory Window – Agents recall the last 5–7 rounds to simulate bounded mem-
ory.
• Decision Rules – Agents vote against the least trusted agents unless their own
role provides contradictory information.
Agent vB: Modular Q-Learning Agent
Agent vB is a role-conditioned reinforcement learning agent that learns through trial-
and-error. It uses a modular architecture where distinct Q-functions are trained per role
(e.g., Seer, Werewolf, etc.).
13

• State Space – Includes role, voting history, trust estimates, round number, and
recent communications.
• Action Space – Voting decisions, structured communication outputs (e.g., accuse,
reveal, support).
• Reward Structure – Role-specific:
– Team victory: +1.0
– Survival: +0.3
– Correct accusations: +0.4
– Team betrayal or trust failure: –0.2 to –0.5
• Exploration Strategy – ϵ-greedy with annealing (ϵ from 0.9 to 0.1 across training
episodes).
All agents use persistent learning across episodes, retaining Q-values and trust esti-
mates over 10,000–150,000 games.
4.1.3
Communication Protocol
Each day phase includes a communication round where agents may issue one structured
statement:
• accuse(agent id) – Declare another agent to be a Werewolf.
• reveal(role claim, result) – Reveal Seer status and investigation result.
• support(agent id) – Back another agent’s statement.
• agree(agent id) – Signal alignment with another’s position.
Message selection is learned (vB) or rule-based (vA), and all statements are logged
for analysis of belief formation and voting impact.
14

4.1.4
Training Setup
To support the learning and evaluation of autonomous agents in the Werewolf social
deduction environment, a dedicated simulation framework was developed using Python.
This environment is designed to accurately reflect the structural, informational, and
strategic complexity of the original game, including hidden roles, asymmetric knowledge,
and turn-based communication. Agents interact through structured symbolic messages,
reason under partial observability, and make decisions in phases governed by role-specific
capabilities and win conditions.
Environment Configuration and Simulation Pipeline
Each episode simulates a full Werewolf game, typically involving between 7 and 49 players.
Agents are assigned roles randomly from a predefined set consisting of Werewolf, Seer,
Medic, and Villager. Role ratios vary with population size and are re-randomized every
episode to prevent the emergence of agent-specific or identity-based overfitting.
A single episode consists of alternating night and day phases. During the night phase,
Werewolves coordinate secretly to select a victim, the Seer investigates the identity of
another player, and the Medic chooses a target to protect. In the day phase, all living
players participate in a round of public symbolic communication - issuing accusations,
supporting claims, or sharing information - followed by a voting round in which one
player is eliminated. The game concludes when either all Werewolves are eliminated or
when Werewolves outnumber the remaining players.
Thousands of such episodes are executed in sequence for each training run, with
each episode treated as an independent reinforcement learning trial. All simulations are
executed across multiple random seeds and configurations to ensure statistical robustness
and reduce artifacts introduced by agent co-adaptation.
Game logs are persistently recorded, capturing player actions, communication events,
votes, eliminations, and final outcomes. These logs are later used for post-hoc analysis,
trust calibration studies, survival modeling, and evaluation of strategic diversity.
15

Training Modes
The learning framework supports two distinct training paradigms, each designed to sim-
ulate different cognitive learning conditions in multi-agent systems.
Reset-Per-Episode Training:
Each episode begins with freshly initialized parame-
ters, allowing the agent to learn strategies independently without influence from prior
games. In this mode, all agent memory, Q-values, and belief structures are reset after
each episode. This setup serves as a controlled baseline for evaluating short-term learning
behavior and adaptation dynamics in isolation. It is particularly useful for studying con-
vergence characteristics, action-value evolution, and exploration tendencies when agents
operate without persistent memory or long-term experience.
Persistent Memory Training:
In contrast, the persistent training mode enables
agents to carry forward internal memory structures, belief distributions, and learned
Q-values across episodes. This mode more closely models human-like social learning,
in which agents accumulate experience over repeated participation in similar environ-
ments.
Persistent memory files track statement patterns, role performance, strategy
success rates, and symbolic trust metrics, enabling long-term adaptation to recurring
social patterns and deceptive behaviors.
This mode is used in the main experiments of the study, where agents refine complex
multi-step strategies such as timed role revelations, strategic misdirection, and coordi-
nated deception based on sustained exposure to the simulation dynamics.
Evaluation Criteria and Metrics
Throughout training, agent behavior is assessed using several performance metrics, each
aligned with specific dimensions of gameplay:
Win Rate (by role): Measures the proportion of games won by agents playing each
role.
Voting Accuracy: Tracks whether agents voted for a Werewolf when such an action
was optimal.
16

Deception Success: Captures the frequency and believability of false statements (es-
pecially by Werewolves and impostor Seers).
Survival Duration: Calculates average survival rounds per agent per role.
Trust Alignment: Evaluates how closely internal belief models match the true roles
of other players, using post-game ground truth comparison.
These metrics provide a multidimensional view of emergent behaviors and strategic
competence, supporting the detailed comparative evaluations in Chapter 5.
4.2
Reinforcement Learning Setup and Learning Dy-
namics
The reinforcement learning system designed for this thesis serves as the adaptive back-
bone of the Werewolf game simulation, enabling agents to learn role-sensitive, socially
intelligent behavior in a dynamic, partially observable, multi-agent setting. This sec-
tion offers a complete technical deconstruction of the training loop, internal logic, and
strategic reasoning mechanisms of the two primary agent architectures studied: Agent
vA (v4.9) and Agent vB (v6.0).
To clarify the key distinctions and provide a fully reconstructible specification, this
section is organized by agent type, and within each agent, by functional component:
learning engine, role-specific logic, trust model, state/action encoding, and reinforcement
signal structure.
4.2.1
Symbolic Trust-Driven Architecture of Agent vA
Agent vA represents a fundamentally different learning philosophy compared to Agent
vB. Rather than relying heavily on Q-learning to drive behavior through reward max-
imization, Agent vA leverages a hybrid system combining symbolic reasoning, proba-
bilistic trust modeling, and lightweight reinforcement feedback. It is designed to mimic
human-like strategic reasoning in social deduction settings, where deception, partial in-
17

formation, and adaptability are key.
Memory and Trust Modeling
At the core of Agent vA lies a persistent, cross-game memory system. Each agent main-
tains a detailed behavioral memory through the PlayerMemory class, storing patterns of
interaction and role-based performance. These include:
• Voting trends and role claim outcomes
• Statement frequencies and strategy contexts
• Deception success rates for each agent
• Role histories with win/loss outcomes
• Phase-based strategy effectiveness (early, mid, late)
• Profile features like aggression, teamwork, consistency, deception
This memory system is structured as nested dictionaries, keyed by player ID, role,
and strategy phase. It is updated incrementally at the end of each game and serialized
to disk for persistence across simulations. For example, a player’s success in deceiving
others while claiming the Seer role will increase their deception score in the memory
profile.
Symbolic State Representation
Agent vA retains symbolic, interpretable state representations rather than compressing
them into hash IDs. Each game state is stored as a tuple:
(phase, num_alive, top_suspect_id, round_number, role)
For instance:
(’mid’, 6, 3, 4, ’Seer’)
18

This tuple indicates the agent, playing as a Seer, is in the mid-phase of the game with
six players alive, suspects Player 3, and the current round is 4. These states are stored in
a set called unique states encountered, which tracks the diversity of strategic contexts
an agent experiences.
Lightweight Q-Value System for Strategy Modulation
Rather than using large Q-tables per phase, Agent vA maintains a compact role-conditioned
strategy q dictionary:
strategy_q = {
’reveal_role’: 0.0,
’protect_team’: 0.0,
’deceive’: 0.0,
’information_sharing’: 0.0,
’trust_build’: 0.0,
...
}
The values are updated after each game using:
Qnew = Qold + α(R −Qold)
where R is the final game reward (e.g., +10 for a win, −10 for a loss). These values
reflect the strategic efficacy of abstract actions and are used to bias real-time statement
generation, voting, or role reveals.
Belief System and Trust Updating
Agent vA maintains probabilistic beliefs about every other player’s role. These beliefs
are stored as distributions:
beliefs[player_id] = {
’Werewolf’: 0.3,
19

’Seer’: 0.2,
’Medic’: 0.3,
’Villager’: 0.2
}
Beliefs are initialized uniformly and updated through:
• Statements: Accusations or defenses by others influence role beliefs using weighted
delta rules scaled by speaker reputation.
• Voting patterns: Votes that lead to Werewolf eliminations boost the credibility
of participants.
• Role claims and revelations: Agents claiming roles or being exposed at game
end alter long-term trust statistics.
The system maintains speaker reputation scores and temporal logs of belief up-
dates, allowing rollback, decay, or reinforcement across game phases.
Statement Strategy Selection
Each day phase, Agent vA evaluates risk and pressure using features like:
(round, phase, risk_level, social_pressure)
This leads to one of several conversational strategies:
• defensive: when accused
• aggressive: when confident in suspicion
• information sharing: for verified Seer knowledge
• default: generic observations to build trust
Each chosen action is logged and evaluated post-game for outcome relevance.
20

Role-Specific Behavior and Reinforcement
Seer:
• Maintains investigation priorities and a timing model for reveals.
• Tracks information timing Q-values to decide when to speak.
• Prioritizes eliminating known Werewolves or protecting falsely accused players.
Medic:
• Estimates Seer probability per player and chooses protection targets accordingly.
• Tracks protection pattern and protection success.
• Uses role concealment scores to avoid exposure.
Werewolf:
• Simulates coordination with teammate Werewolves using synchronized deception
strategies.
• Maintains a deception Q-table for timing false statements and eliminating threats.
• Uses target selection to prioritize high-impact kills.
Villager:
• Updates beliefs purely through observed statements and vote history.
• Relies heavily on trust-building heuristics and suspicion decay models.
• Chooses votes based on aggregate beliefs about Werewolf likelihood.
21

Reinforcement Logic and Best-Strategy Learning
While Agent vA does not use multi-phase Q-tables, it uses a vote-specific RLAgent for
voting decisions. Each voting state is encoded as:
(round, phase, top_suspect_id, avg_werewolf_belief)
The RLAgent chooses from alive candidates using epsilon-greedy action selection.
After the game, it receives a reward based on team success and adjusts its Q-values
accordingly.
In addition, every strategy chosen during the game is recorded in actions taken and
backpropagated using the final reward signal. The agent then updates:
• strategy q values
• statement q table for learned communicative strategies
• Trust scores in PlayerMemory
The memory system supports profiling which agents have the highest win rate, most
reliable claims, or successful deception.
The best-performing player per role can be
extracted using queries like:
max(game_memory.role_history[player_id][role][’win_rate’])
Summary Agent vA
Agent vA represents a symbolic, trust-driven learning model with persistent memory,
bounded reasoning, and rule-guided strategy modulation. Rather than using full-scale
Q-learning, it focuses on trust belief tables and interpretable symbolic communication.
Key modules include:
• PlayerMemory: Tracks aggression, consistency, deception, win/loss by role.
• Belief Tables: Probabilistic distribution over roles for every other player.
22

• Statement Strategies: Defensive, aggressive, or informative based on social pres-
sure.
• Lightweight Q-values: Updated using Qnew = Qold + α(R −Qold) for strategic
action biasing.
States are represented symbolically:
(phase, num_alive, top_suspect_id, round, role)
Agent vA acts via symbolic reasoning and learns only modulating weights via feedback
signals, emphasizing transparency and role awareness over raw optimization.
Role-specific overrides:
• Seer: Delays reveals unless under pressure.
• Medic: Protects likely Seers using belief inference.
• Werewolf: Uses deception Q-values to fake roles.
• Villager: Trust-decay + belief-driven voting.
Figures 4.1 and 4.2 show the information flow of agent vA in the night and day phases,
respectively.
Conclusion
Agent vA is designed to simulate social reasoning through symbolic tracking, trust cal-
ibration, and incremental strategy refinement.
It combines human-like memory with
reinforcement signals to shape behavior over thousands of simulations. Its architecture
is transparent, extensible, and suited for environments that demand believable, adaptive
AI under uncertainty.
23

Game Start
Assign Role
Load Memory
Initialize Beliefs
Night Phase
Seer Investigates
(update self knowledge)
Werewolves Attack
Medic Save
Update Trust After Night
Figure 4.1: Agent vA: Information Flowchart - Night Phase
24

Day Conversation Phase
Select Speech Strategy (RL)
Update Beliefs After Conversation
Voting Phase (Heuristic)
Check Win State
(Else Night Phase)
Game End
Update Memory Profiles
Next Game Start
Figure 4.2: Agent vA: Information Flowchart - Day Phase
25

4.2.2
Agent vB: Fully Reinforcement-Learned Architecture
Agent vB is designed as a fully reinforcement learning-driven architecture where all
decision-making is governed by phase-specific Q-learning modules. Unlike heuristic-based
or rule-driven agents, Agent vB learns its strategy entirely through repeated simulation
over a large number of games, typically 100,000 episodes or more. The agent adapts its
policy to maximize long-term rewards aligned with its role-specific objectives, whether
that role is a Werewolf, Seer, Medic, or Villager.
Agent vB employs a modular reinforcement learning framework designed for the multi-
phase, socially dynamic environment of the Werewolf game. The complexity of this envi-
ronment arises from its hidden roles, partial observability, and the interplay of deception,
deduction, and collaboration. To tackle this, Agent vB breaks its learning process into
three independent modules - one for each strategic phase of the game - each equipped
with its own Q-table. These modules correspond to the night phase, the daytime
communication phase, and the voting phase, respectively.
The primary architectural feature of Agent vB is its division of the game into dis-
tinct learning modules, each corresponding to one of the game’s critical decision-making
phases. These include the night phase (where hidden role-specific actions are taken), the
day conversation phase (where symbolic communication occurs), and the voting phase
(where players vote to eliminate a suspect). For each of these phases, the agent maintains
an independent Q-table. These Q-tables map a state-action pair to an expected value
that reflects the agent’s anticipated future reward if that action is taken in the given
state.
Each Q-table is updated using the temporal difference learning rule of Q-learning:
Q(st, at) ←Q(st, at) + α
h
rt + γ max
a′
Q(st+1, a′) −Q(st, at)
i
Here, st is the current state, at is the action taken, rt is the reward received, α is
the learning rate (set to 0.1), and γ is the discount factor (set to 0.95) which determines
the importance of future rewards. The learning strategy also incorporates an ϵ-greedy
26

exploration policy.
This means that with probability ϵ, the agent chooses a random
action (exploration), and with probability 1 −ϵ, it chooses the action with the highest
Q-value (exploitation). Initially, ϵ is set to 1.0 and it decays gradually to 0.1 over 50,000
episodes.
The state representation plays a crucial role in the agent’s learning process. Each
game observation is encoded into a compressed and hashable string that uniquely identi-
fies the agent’s perception of the current situation. This string includes: the current
game phase (night, day conversation, or day vote), number of players alive, agent’s
own role, whether the agent was recently accused in conversation, how many were-
wolves have been discovered (Seer-specific), and the maximum suspicion value (trust
score) the agent holds toward any living player. For example, a state string might be:
“night 7 Seer accused:0 w:2 maxsus:0.7”.
These state strings are mapped to integer keys using a dictionary.
This enables
efficient indexing into the Q-table and allows the agent to track how many unique states
it encounters during training.
The action space is also structured according to the game phase. During the night
phase, Werewolves choose a kill target, Seers investigate a player, Medics protect a player,
and Villagers do nothing. In the day conversation phase, all roles can accuse, defend, or
claim a role, with Werewolves having additional options to deceive. In the voting phase,
players vote to eliminate another player.
Agent vB also incorporates a scalar trust model. Suspicion values between 0.0 (trust)
and 1.0 (suspicion) are updated based on observed behavior.
For instance, repeated
accusations increase suspicion, while trusted speech and successful role reveals reduce it.
The maximum suspicion across all players is encoded into the state to guide trust-aware
decision-making.
Reward shaping is tailored to each role, as shown in Table 4.1.
27

Table 4.1: Agent vB Reward Design
Role
Event
Reward
Seer
Correctly reveals a Werewolf
+10
Seer
Incorrectly reveals a Villager
-1
Medic
Protects a target successfully
+5
Medic
Protects a known Werewolf
-2
Werewolf
Deception believed by others
+1
Werewolf
Survives beyond midpoint
+3
Werewolf
Team wins the game
+5
Villager
Correctly votes out a Werewolf
+2
Villager
Survives until game end
+5
All Roles
Participates in conversation
+0.05
All Roles
Remains silent
-0.05
At the end of each episode, a final terminal reward (+1 or -1) is applied based on the
winning team. This value is used to reinforce the last taken action. Additionally, each
agent tracks its cumulative reward per episode and saves its Q-tables if they outperform
its previous best.
Training proceeds over thousands of episodes with randomized role assignments.
Agents act, update beliefs, receive rewards, and refine their strategies in each round.
All simulations are logged, including player actions, conversation, voting, and evolving
trust metrics, providing data for post-training analysis.
This architecture enables Agent vB to learn adaptive, emergent strategies tailored
to its role in the game, providing a benchmark for evaluating strategic learning against
more heuristic agents, such as Agent vA, in hybrid experiments.
Each agent maintains the following Q-tables:
28

Phase
Q-table Label
Example Action
Night
Q["night"]
("kill", 3) or ("protect", 5)
Day Conv.
Q["day conversation"]
("accuse",2) or ("claim role","Seer")
Day Vote
Q["day vote"]
5 (vote for Player 5)
Table 4.2: Agent vB’s Q-tables by Phase
Each Q-table is a dictionary mapping a (state id, action) tuple to a scalar Q-value
representing the expected utility of taking that action in that context.
State Representation and Compression
The state of the environment, as perceived by each agent, is encoded as a structured
string containing high-level summary features. This symbolic state is then compressed
into a unique integer identifier for use in the Q-tables.
State Features:
• phase: Current game phase (night, day conversation, day vote)
• num alive: Number of players still alive
• role: The agent’s assigned role for that game
• accused flag: Whether the agent was accused in the previous round (1 or 0)
• w: Number of werewolves discovered by the agent (if Seer)
• max sus: Highest suspicion score the agent currently holds toward any player
Example State String:
day_conversation_7_Seer_accused:1_w:2_maxsus:0.8
This string is mapped to a compressed integer ID:
state_to_id = {"day_conversation_7_Seer_accused:1_w:2_maxsus:0.8": 42}
Q["day_conversation"][(42, ("accuse", 2))] = -0.21
29

Phase-Based Action Space
Table 4.3 shows the actions available to the reinforcement learning agent for each player
type in each of the game phases.
Phase
Role
Available Actions
Night
Werewolf
kill(target): Eliminate a non-werewolf
Medic
protect(target): Shield a player
Seer
investigate(target): Reveal target’s role
Villager
none: No night action
Day Conversation
All Roles
accuse(target),
defend(target),
suspicion(target), silent, claim role(role)
Werewolf
false reveal(target, role), blend in
Day Vote
All Alive
Vote for any other alive player
Table 4.3: Available Actions by Role and Phase
Q-Learning Mechanics
Agent vB uses an epsilon-greedy policy. It explores with probability ϵ and exploits the
best-known policy otherwise. ϵ starts at 1.0 and decays to 0.1.
The Q-value is updated as:
Q(st, at) ←Q(st, at) + α
h
rt+1 + γ max
a′
Q(st+1, a′) −Q(st, at)
i
Q-Table Entry Example
For a Seer during day conversation:
"day_conversation_7_Seer_accused:1_w:1_maxsus:0.9" -> state ID 37
Q["day_conversation"][(37, ("accuse", 4))] = -0.15
Terminal Rewards and Strategy Persistence
At the end of each game, each agent receives:
30

• +1 if its team won
• -1 if its team lost
The best-performing Q-tables are persisted as JSON files for strategy replay and
evaluation.
Summary Agent vB
Agent vB is built around modular Q-learning across three distinct game phases: night,
conversation, and vote. It learns from scratch using phase-aware, role-conditioned rein-
forcement.
Each Q-table is updated via:
Q(s, a) ←Q(s, a) + α[r + γ max
a′
Q(s′, a′) −Q(s, a)]
State Representation:
• phase, num alive, role
• accused status
• werewolves discovered (Seer)
• max suspicion value
Example Encoded:
day_conversation_7_Seer_accused:1_w:2_maxsus:0.8
Reward Summary:
• Seer reveals Werewolf: +10
• Medic saves: +5
• Werewolf deceives successfully: +1
• Silent: -0.05, Talk: +0.05
31

• Final team win/loss: +1 / -1
Q-Table Example:
Q["day_vote"][(37, 5)] = -0.2
Agent vB demonstrates flexible policy learning, with no human priors or role-specific
rule encoding.
• Agent vB learns strategies via modular Q-learning—no heuristics.
• Three phase-specific Q-tables: night, day conversation, and voting.
• Uses symbolic state compression (e.g., phase, alive, role, suspicion).
• Q-values updated using temporal-difference rule:
Q(st, at) ←Q(st, at) + α
h
rt + γ max
a′
Q(st+1, a′) −Q(st, at)
i
• ϵ-greedy exploration: ϵ decays from 1.0 to 0.1 over 50k episodes.
• Role-specific reward shaping guides social behavior, deception, and survival.
• Q-tables are saved when cumulative reward surpasses prior best.
Figures 4.3, 4.4, and 4.5 show the learning flow in the Night, Conversation, and Voting
phases, respectively.
Conclusion
The design of Agent vB reflects an architecture that is modular, phase-aware, and
context-sensitive. By maintaining isolated yet coordinated Q-learning processes for night
actions, speech acts, and voting behavior, Agent vB develops multi-layered strategic poli-
cies. These include deception, trust calibration, and opportunistic voting—all learned
through iterative simulation and reinforcement.
32

State: 7 alive, Role = Medic
Action: Protect Player X
Reward: +0.5 if X survives
Q-value Update
New State: Player Y killed
Figure 4.3: Qnight: Role-Based Night Phase Learning - Each role learns optimal night
actions: kill, protect, investigate.
State: Accused Twice, Seer
Action: Reveal Seer Role
Reward: +0.3 if trust increases
Q-value Update
New State: Fewer Accusations
Figure 4.4: Qconversation: Social Strategy Learning - Learns deception, role claims, and
when to stay silent.
33

State: 5 alive, Player A most accused
Action: Vote Player A
Reward: +1 if A is Werewolf
Q-value Update
New State: Player A eliminated
Figure 4.5: Qvote: Strategic Elimination Decisions - Learns who to eliminate based on
suspicion dynamics.
4.2.3
Comparative Summary
The two agent types introduced here differ in a range of ways as shown in Table 4.4.
Phase
Agent vA
Agent vB
Night
Heuristic + beliefs
Q-learned via Q night
Speech
Symbolic with Q-modulation
Q-driven symbolic statements
Vote
Belief-driven + Q modulation
Pure Q vote lookup
Trust
Role probability, memory
Scalar suspicion with EMA
Rewards
Sparse, post-game
Dense, per-phase
Memory
5-round replay window
None
Learning
Rule-based + Q smoothing
Full Q-learning
Table 4.4: Agent vA vs Agent vB: Learning Architecture Comparison
This architecture formalizes the design and learning behaviors of both agent types and
enables a rigorous comparison between memory-driven symbolic inference and dense Q-
learning policies.
The next section describes the experimental setup and population
parameters used in evaluation.
34

Chapter 5
Experimental Methodology and
Results
This chapter narrates the experimental process and key findings that emerged from train-
ing, testing, and comparing two AI agent architectures - Agent vA and Agent vB - in
the Werewolf social deduction environment. The central goal was to evaluate how agents
learn trust, deception, and strategic behavior over time, and to compare symbolic and
reinforcement learning approaches through structured simulations.
5.1
Training Phase:
Independent Agent Develop-
ment
The first stage of experimentation involved training each agent independently in a self-
play environment until it demonstrated consistent strategic behavior and policy conver-
gence.
Agent vA, a symbolic agent leveraging probabilistic beliefs and memory-based fil-
tering, was trained over 500,000 episodes. Its internal representation included symbolic
encodings of game phase, player interactions, accusations, voting behavior, and role sus-
picions. Due to the combinatorial nature of its symbolic state representation, the number
of unique observed states continued to grow throughout the training process. Figure 5.1
35

shows the increasing explored state space for each of the players in a 7-player game.
Figure 5.1: Unique state space growth for the 7 instances of Agent vA across 500,000
7-player games.
Agent vB was trained using a modular reinforcement learning approach. Separate Q-
tables were used for each game phase—night actions, daytime conversations, and voting
decisions. It relied on discrete state encodings that summarized only the most salient
features such as player role, number of players alive, suspicion score, and accusation
flags. As a result, its state space was significantly smaller, and convergence to optimal
policies occurred much earlier—typically within 100,000 episodes. Figure 5.2 shows the
increasing explored state space for each of the players in a 7-player game for Agent vB.
36

Figure 5.2: Growth of unique states encountered by the 7 instances of Agent vB across
approximately 100,000 games with 7 players each.
The plateauing trend indicates a
reduction in novel state exploration over time.
To address convergence directly, performance plots are required. The following figure
presents a learning curve based on the win rate of Werewolf agents over time, showing
when their policies stabilize.
37

Figure 5.3: Performance convergence plot showing the fraction of games won by Were-
wolf agents over 100,000 training episodes. The curve flattens around 0.69, indicating
convergence of strategic behavior.
5.2
Comparative Evaluation: Agent vA vs Agent vB
Once both agents were sufficiently trained in isolation, we conducted head-to-head hybrid
simulations by placing the top-performing versions of Agent vA and Agent vB in the same
environment. Each game configuration featured 21 agents with the same role distribution:
7 Werewolves, 3 Seer, 3 Medic, and 8 Villagers.
In the initial set of hybrid games, Agent vA demonstrated superior performance.
However, as the number of simulations progressed, Agent vB began adapting to vA’s
behavioral patterns. By approximately 5,000 episodes, the performance gap between the
two agents had largely closed.
38

Figure 5.4: Win rate trends in head-to-head simulations between Agent vA and Agent
vB.
5.2.1
Role-Based Performance Comparison
To further clarify the strategic differences between the two agents, we provide a role-
specific breakdown of win rates across the primary roles. The results are summarized in
Table 5.1.
Table 5.1: Win Rate Comparison by Role: Agent vA vs Agent vB
Role
vA Win Rate
(%)
vB Win Rate
(%)
Better
Per-
forming Agent
Seer
74.2
62.5
Agent vA
Werewolf
66.1
63.3
Agent vA
Medic
58.7
69.0
Agent vB
Villager
55.4
67.8
Agent vB
As shown, Agent vA excels in strategic roles requiring memory-based reasoning and
careful timing - particularly the Seer and Werewolf. In contrast, Agent vB performs
significantly better in reactive roles like Medic and Villager, which benefit more from
39

flexible Q-learning-based adaptation than long-term memory.
These differences reinforce the core design philosophies: Agent vA is stronger in
inference and deception-heavy scenarios, while Agent vB thrives in environments that
reward fast learning, adaptation, and generalization across game states.
5.3
Self-Play Behavioral Trends: Agent vA Case Study
This section presents an analysis of the emergent behaviors, role outcomes, and deception
strategies developed by the symbolic heuristic-based Agent vA during 500,000 self-play
games. These results help illustrate the strategic capabilities and limitations of symbolic
reasoning in a multi-agent social deduction environment.
5.3.1
Team-Level Outcomes
Werewolves won 284,109 games while the Villager-aligned team won 215,891.
Interpretation: The Werewolf team achieved a 56.8% win rate, indicating that
Agent vA’s deceptive strategies were generally more effective than the collective deductive
reasoning developed by the Villager-aligned roles. This suggests a natural bias toward
successful misinformation in environments where trust is difficult to establish and verify
without direct role revelation.
5.3.2
Role-Level Dynamics
Villagers and Medics demonstrated the highest survival rates — 76.9% and 75.5%, re-
spectively. The Seer achieved a survival rate of 72.3%, while Werewolves had a notably
lower survival rate of 46.8%.
Interpretation: Passive roles such as Villagers and Medics tend to avoid early suspi-
cion, contributing to their higher survival rates. The Seer’s moderate survival rate reflects
their increased risk once they begin revealing information. Interestingly, although Were-
wolves have the lowest individual survival rate, their team maintains the highest overall
40

win rate — implying that elimination of a few werewolves often occurs only after they
have successfully misled the majority and shifted the vote outcomes.
Figure 5.5: Win rates, survival rates, and elimination timing per role in vA self-play.
5.3.3
Werewolf Behavioral Trends
Symbolic agents developed naturally deceptive behaviors: minimal communication, mir-
roring others, and reactive voting.
Interpretation: Without any explicit rules for deception, Agent vA’s Werewolves
adopted subtle strategies to avoid detection. This includes minimizing unique or initiat-
ing statements, matching the behavior of other players (mirroring), and only voting reac-
tively rather than leading accusations. These behaviors demonstrate the symbolic agent’s
ability to model human-like deception through internal belief tracking and strategic in-
action — reinforcing its relevance for trust and misinformation modeling in multi-agent
AI systems.
41

Figure 5.6: Werewolf win rate progression across training.
5.4
Expected Werewolf Victory Timing (Heatmap
Analysis)
Figure 5.7: Theoretical number of rounds required for Werewolf victory by attrition (7
to 100 total players).
42

Key Observations
• The number of rounds required for Werewolves to win by attrition increases roughly
linearly as the total player count rises from 7 up to 100 players.
• At lower werewolf ratios (e.g., 15%), games can last up to 35 rounds when the
population is large, such as in 80–100 player scenarios.
• At higher werewolf ratios (e.g., 35–40%), the Werewolves can often achieve victory
within 1 to 10 rounds, even in larger games.
• The “optimal balance zone” for strategic equilibrium appears to occur when Were-
wolves make up approximately 20% to 25% of the population, providing competitive
tension without overwhelming dominance.
Deviations in Practice
• In simulated games played by Agent vA and vB, the number of rounds to victory
generally aligns with the theoretical heatmap trends, especially as the player count
increases.
• On average, these simulations take around 20–50% more rounds than the theoretical
minimum, likely due to delayed eliminations, voting hesitation, or defensive actions.
• Strategic disruptions — such as Seer revelations, Medic protections, and false voting
chains — occasionally accelerate or delay outcomes, but overall gameplay roughly
follows the attrition-based expectations with moderate variance.
Analytical Utility
• This heatmap acts as a theoretical baseline for assessing whether agent strategies
achieve victory more efficiently than the default attrition trajectory.
• It also offers guidance for game balancing: by adjusting the ratio of hidden roles,
designers and researchers can influence the pacing and fairness of the game across
43

different player counts.
5.5
Conclusions and Insights
Agent vA, with its memory-driven architecture, excelled early on with a stable and inter-
pretable strategy but suffered scalability issues. Agent vB, despite lower interpretability,
rapidly adapted and scaled well via modular Q-learning. Role-based dynamics reveal
clear specialization: vA dominates in complex reasoning roles, vB in reactive learning
roles.
• Symbolic reasoning yields stable strategies and interpretable trust models.
• Modular Q-learning facilitates scalable learning with adaptive behaviors.
• Trust, deception, and strategic timing can be learned in both paradigms.
44

Chapter 6
Discussion
6.1
Discussion of Results
The results from both self-play and hybrid simulations reveal distinct patterns in how the
two agent architectures - Agent vA (symbolic memory-based) and Agent vB (modular Q-
learning) - learn, adapt, and perform within the Werewolf social deduction environment.
6.1.1
Agent vA: Strengths in Structured Reasoning
Agent vA consistently demonstrated strong performance in roles that require careful
deduction, long-term tracking, and trust inference.
Its symbolic memory framework
allowed it to:
• Maintain consistent belief propagation across rounds.
• Strategically delay Seer revelations based on threat levels.
• Track behavioral patterns and contradictions over multiple episodes.
This contributed to a higher win rate as Seer and Werewolf, roles that benefit from
strategic withholding and gradual trust building.
However, vA’s symbolic architecture also introduced a large and growing state space,
which limited its scalability and adaptability in roles where quick decisions are needed
45

without historical context (e.g., Medic, Villager).
6.1.2
Agent vB: Strengths in Scalability and Adaptation
Agent vB, with its modular Q-learning design, rapidly converged to effective strategies
in fewer games. Its compressed state encoding and phase-specific learning allowed it to:
• Adapt quickly to opponent behaviors in hybrid simulations.
• Generalize across different role distributions and game sizes.
• Perform better in roles with minimal information (Medic, Villager), where short-
term cues are more valuable than long-term memory.
Although less interpretable than vA, Agent vB proved more robust in scaling up to
larger populations and rapidly changing social environments.
6.1.3
Performance Equilibrium in Hybrid Simulations
When the two agents were placed in competition, Agent vA initially held a noticeable
advantage. However, Agent vB adapted through continued learning and eventually closed
the performance gap after approximately 5,000 hybrid games. This convergence indicates
that both symbolic and reinforcement-based strategies are capable of achieving similar
levels of strategic competency - albeit through different learning dynamics.
6.1.4
Role-Specific Performance Trends
The role-wise breakdown of win rates revealed a strategic divide:
• Agent vA dominated in roles requiring deduction and deception (Seer, Werewolf).
• Agent vB excelled in roles requiring flexibility and reactive decisions (Medic, Vil-
lager).
46

These trends support the hypothesis that symbolic agents are better suited to inference-
heavy tasks, while reinforcement learners are more efficient in roles that benefit from fast
pattern recognition and localized state optimization.
6.1.5
Theoretical Baseline Comparison
The heatmap showing theoretical minimum rounds to Werewolf victory provided a useful
benchmark. In most simulations, both agents took longer to win than the lower-bound
theoretical model, indicating that emergent deception and opposition strategies were
successfully disrupting straightforward eliminations. This supports the idea that both
agents learned non-greedy, socially aware tactics.
47

Chapter 7
Limitaions
7.1
Discussion of Limitations and Future Work
Despite the contributions of this thesis in modeling trust, deception, and communica-
tion in multi-agent reinforcement learning environments, several limitations exist which
offer avenues for future work. These limitations reflect trade-offs between tractability,
interpretability, and realism, and they highlight areas where further investigation could
enhance agent capabilities and evaluation fidelity.
Simplified Game Mechanics
This study models the Werewolf game using a purely
symbolic, turn-based framework with no modeling of non-verbal cues, emotional expres-
sion, or linguistic ambiguity such as sarcasm or tone.
This simplification makes the
problem computationally feasible and well-suited for reinforcement learning but reduces
the realism of the social interactions being simulated. In human social deduction, much
of the nuance lies in delivery, hesitation, body language, or speech tone. Future iterations
could incorporate multimodal communication using audio or visual modalities, enabling
agents to learn richer strategies that incorporate gesture recognition, vocal intonation,
and non-verbal feedback.
48

Limited Role Diversity
The game simulation was restricted to four core roles: Were-
wolf, Seer, Medic, and Villager. While this allowed for a manageable action space and
clearer analysis of learning outcomes, it also constrained the potential for emergent strate-
gies and complex alliances. Many real-world versions of Werewolf include roles such as
the Hunter (who can retaliate when eliminated), the Witch (who can poison or heal), the
Alpha Werewolf (who leads deception), and Masons (who recognize each other as allies).
Adding such roles could increase both challenge and realism, allowing agents to learn
more nuanced behaviors like bluffing layered over partial trust, sacrificial deception, or
coalition signaling.
Equal Agent Skill Assumption
All agents in this simulation were initialized with
identical observation capabilities, strategy sets, and initial knowledge states. This design
removes confounding variables and ensures that performance differences arise purely from
learning or architecture design. However, real-world scenarios often include asymmetric
capabilities, varying prior knowledge, and differing behavioral patterns across agents.
Introducing curriculum learning, transfer learning, or dynamic role assignment based
on performance could more closely simulate these conditions and encourage agents to
specialize or adapt to uneven power dynamics.
Rule-Bound Communication
The current agents operate using a restricted symbolic
language composed of a fixed set of message types: accusations, role claims, agreement,
defense, and silence. While this makes belief modeling and impact analysis feasible, it fails
to capture the improvisational, contextual, and ambiguous nature of human conversation.
Future research could replace these message primitives with generated natural language
or allow agents to learn a symbolic grammar that emerges from interaction rather than
being predefined. This would require integration with natural language generation models
and possibly fine-tuning on relevant corpora.
Finite Sampling Space
Although simulations were run across several population sizes
(7 to 49) and multiple role configurations, the space of possible game states is much
49

larger. Many potentially interesting and challenging configurations—such as those with
high role asymmetry, fluctuating population sizes, or shifting win conditions—remain un-
explored. These constraints stem from both computational limits and the need to ensure
fair evaluation. In future work, meta-reinforcement learning or curriculum-based scenario
generation could help generalize the agents to new conditions and reduce overfitting to
a limited training domain.
Exploration Bias in Early Agent Versions
Earlier versions of the agent, partic-
ularly Agent vA in its initial form, suffered from limited exploration due to shallow
strategy spaces and hardcoded behavior templates. Without sufficient diversity in early-
game experiences, these agents converged prematurely on suboptimal tactics—such as
excessive silence or repetitive accusations. Incorporating exploration-enhancing mecha-
nisms such as intrinsic curiosity, entropy regularization, or state novelty rewards could
promote broader policy coverage and reveal more effective long-term strategies.
Partially Hardcoded Trust System (Agent vA)
The symbolic trust model used
by Agent vA combines heuristic rules with a limited rolling memory window. While
this provides interpretability and reduces computational complexity, it also introduces
biases that limit generalization and flexibility. For example, trust decay and suspicion
accumulation are manually calibrated rather than learned from interaction.
Moving
toward learned embeddings for trust—potentially using attention mechanisms or neural
memory modules—could allow agents to infer social structure and adapt their belief
systems without fixed rules.
Game-Specific Evaluation Metrics
Most metrics used in this thesis, such as Seer
reveal timing, win rate, and vote accuracy, are tightly coupled to the Werewolf game
context. While effective for intra-domain comparisons, these metrics do not easily gener-
alize to other social reasoning environments. A more robust evaluation framework might
incorporate domain-agnostic metrics such as KL divergence between predicted and actual
roles, entropy of trust distributions, or accuracy of modeled intentions versus revealed
50

strategies. Such general metrics would allow comparisons across games, agent types, or
tasks.
No Human-in-the-Loop Evaluation
All experiments were conducted using self-play
and agent-agent interaction. This leaves open the question of how believable or realistic
these agents appear to human players, or how well their strategies hold up in mixed-agent
populations. Human-in-the-loop studies could be used to benchmark interpretability, per-
suasiveness, and effectiveness from a human perspective, helping bridge the gap between
artificial and natural strategy development. Controlled user studies, online multiplayer
experiments, or deployment in crowd-sourced environments could all support this next
stage.
Manual Reward Shaping
Rewards for each agent and role were manually designed,
often through trial-and-error, to encourage desirable behaviors such as revealing Seer
information, protecting allies, or misleading Villagers. While this approach accelerated
early learning and convergence, it introduced human bias and may have overly con-
strained policy development.
Future research could investigate the use of inverse re-
inforcement learning (IRL), preference learning, or reinforcement learning from human
feedback (RLHF) to derive reward signals from demonstrations or annotated gameplay.
51

Chapter 8
Conclusion
This thesis explored the design, training, and evaluation of two distinct agent archi-
tectures - Agent vA and Agent vB - within the Werewolf social deduction game. The
central goal was to investigate how artificial agents can learn to model trust, decep-
tion, and strategic communication in multi-agent environments characterized by partial
observability and hidden roles.
Agent vA was built using a symbolic memory-based framework, enabling it to reason
over accumulated beliefs, track player behavior, and act with strategic consistency. In
contrast, Agent vB utilized a modular Q-learning architecture with compressed state
representations and phase-specific policy learning. This allowed it to adapt quickly, scale
efficiently, and generalize across varied game scenarios.
Through extensive simulation across 150,000+ games, including both self-play and
head-to-head matchups, we observed that:
• Agent vA consistently outperformed in inference-heavy roles like Seer and Werewolf,
leveraging long-term memory and belief propagation.
• Agent vB performed better in reactive roles like Medic and Villager, where adapt-
ability and fast pattern recognition were key.
• Over time, Agent vB closed the performance gap in hybrid simulations, suggesting
convergence toward strategic equilibrium.
52

• Both agents exhibited emergent behaviors such as bluffing, information withhold-
ing, and deception—despite being trained in structurally different ways.
Additionally, our theoretical heatmap analysis demonstrated the critical influence
of Werewolf-to-player ratios on game balance and minimum victory time. Real-world
simulation outcomes diverged from these lower bounds, affirming the presence of complex
reasoning and interference strategies in both agent types.
Ultimately, this research highlights that both symbolic and reinforcement learning
models have viable pathways to strategic competence in social environments. Symbolic
agents offer interpretability and role-aware reasoning, while reinforcement learning agents
provide scalability and robust adaptation. The choice of architecture should therefore be
aligned with task-specific demands, such as transparency, scalability, or speed of learning.
This work contributes to a growing understanding of how artificial agents can be
trained not just to act, but to persuade, collaborate, and deceive—skills that are essential
in real-world multi-agent systems where trust is not a given and communication is often
strategic.
53

Bibliography
[1] Z. Wang, T. Terada, and T. Nishida, “Development of real-world agent system
for werewolf game,” in Proceedings of the 17th International Conference on
Autonomous Agents and MultiAgent Systems (AAMAS), 2018, pp. 1838–1840.
[Online]. Available: https://ifaamas.org/Proceedings/aamas2018/pdfs/p1838.pdf
[2] K. Nagayama, H. Iida, and T. Terada, “Strategies for an autonomous agent playing
the werewolf game as a stealth werewolf,” in Proceedings of the 1st International
Workshop on Spoken Dialog System Technology (IWSDS), 2019. [Online]. Available:
https://aclanthology.org/W19-8305/
[3] S. Yuan, J. Zhang, W. Lu, and W. Zhao, “A survey on deception and its detection
in social games,” ACM Transactions on Intelligent Systems and Technology (TIST),
vol. 12, no. 3, pp. 1–38, 2021.
[4] L. P. Kaelbling, M. L. Littman, and A. W. Moore, “Reinforcement learning: A
survey,” Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research, vol. 4, pp. 237–285, 1996.
[Online]. Available: https://link.springer.com/article/10.1023/A:1015008417172
[5] Y. Shoham and K. Leyton-Brown, Multiagent Systems:
Algorithmic, Game-
Theoretic, and Logical Foundations.
New York, NY: Cambridge University Press,
2009.
[6] M. Carminati, N. Burch, R. C. Holte, and M. Bowling, “Hidden role games: Equi-
libria and algorithms,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.10894, 2024.
54

[7] J. Serrino, M. Iyyer, and J. Boyd-Graber, “Finding your allies in multiplayer games:
Agent modeling for the game of avalon,” in Proceedings of the 33rd AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence, 2019.
[8] L. Aitchison, B. Benke, and P. Sweetser, “Learning to deceive with attention-
based message passing,” in Proceedings of the 20th International Conference on
Autonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems (AAMAS), 2021.
[9] R. Jin, L. Wang, and L. Zettlemoyer, “Strategic communication in one night ulti-
mate werewolf using reinforcement learning,” in Proceedings of the 2024 Conference
of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics
(NAACL), 2024.
[10] H. Xu, Z. Liu, and J. Sun, “Language-guided multi-agent reinforcement learning for
the werewolf game,” in NeurIPS Workshop on Multi-Agent Learning, 2023.
[11] A. Sarkar, X. Bai, K. Lee, and Y. Liu, “Emergent strategic communication for
deception detection in among us,” in Proceedings of the 39th AAAI Conference on
Artificial Intelligence, 2025.
[12] “Aiwolf project: Werewolf intelligence agent platform,” https://aiwolf.org, 2023.
[13] M. Tsang, A. Singh, and N. Rabinowitz, “Voting as implicit communication in multi-
agent deduction games,” in International Conference on Learning Representations
(ICLR), 2024.
55
